

	
75
51st Annual Report & Accounts
2025 - 26
CENTRAL MINE PLANNING & DESIGN INSTITUTE LIMITED
(A SUBSIDIARY OF COAL INDIA LIMITED)
A Mini Ratna Company (Cat-I)
AN ISO 9001:2015 CERTIFIED
GONDWANA PLACE, KANKE ROAD 
RANCHI - 834 008 
CIN: L14292 JH1975 GOI 001223
 Website: www.cmpdi.co.in


76
Vision
To be the global market leader in an expanding
Earth resource sector and allied professional activities.
Mission
To provide total consultancy in coal and
mineral exploration, mining, engineering and allied fields as the premier 
consultant in India and also in the international arena.
Management Policy of CMPDIL
With a mission of exploration of coal and other mineral resources and 
providing consultancy in mine planning, design, associated engineering and 
management systems, CMPDIL, as a premier consultant, strives to be the 
market leader in the expanding earth resource sector and other professional 
activities.
We are committed to:
1.	Continually improve the quality of our consultancy and other support 
services with due consideration of the environment, information security 
and energy performance;
2.	Protect the environment by minimizing the adverse impact of our activities 
on it by consistently reducing, reusing and recycling a part of the waste 
generated;
3.	Provide the resources for achieving the objectives and targets of the quality, 
environment, energy and information security management systems;
4.	Protect our information assets from threats and interruptions to maintain 
business continuity and continually improve information security 
performance;
5.	Comply with the legal and all other applicable requirements.
GENERAL NOTE FOR SHAREHOLDERS OF CENTRAL MINE PLANNING 
& DESIGN INSTITUTE LIMITED
The Annual Accounts of CMPDIL would be kept for inspection and also would 
be available at the Headquarter for providing information to any Shareholder of 
Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Limited on demand.



	
77
CONTENTS
Sl. 
No. 	 Subjects	
Page
1.  	 Management during 2025-2026 	
01
2.  	 Members’ of the Board as on 17.08.2026	
02
3.	
Corporate Information	
03
4.  	 Notice for 51st Annual General Meeting                 	
04
5. 	
Chairman’s Statement	
22
6.	
Performance at a Glance	
35
7.	
Financial Overview & Statistics	
36
8. 	
Directors' Report	
38
9.	
Annexure to Directors’ Report	
159
10. CEO & CFO Certificate 
166
11.	
Report on Corporate Governance	
167
12. 	 Statutory Auditors' Report along with replies of Management  	
191
13.	 Secretarial Auditor's Report, compliance of conditions of Corporate  
Governance Certificate and Management Response 
227
14.	 Comments of the Comptroller & Auditor General of India under 	
241 
section 143(6) (b)
15.	 Annual Report on Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR)	
243
16.	 Audited Statements of Accounts along with Cash Flow Statement	
246
17.	 Notes to the Financial Statements	
286


78
Shri Chaudhari Shivraj Singh
Shri Sudip Dasgupta
Shri Abhishek Mundhra
Shri Mukesh Agrawal
Shri Marapally Venkateshwarlu
Shri Nripendra Nath
Shri Rajeev Kumar Sinha
Shri Ajay Kumar
BOARD OF DIRECTORS AS ON 31.03.2026
PART-TIME OFFICIAL DIRECTORS
FUNCTIONAL DIRECTORS
CHAIRMAN-CUM-MANAGING DIRECTOR
COMPANY SECRETARY
CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER



	
1
MANAGEMENT DURING 2025-2026
FUNCTIONAL DIRECTORS
Shri Chaudhari Shivraj Singh	
:	
Chairman-cum-Managing Director (From 02.01.2026)
Shri Satish Jha	
:	
Chairman-cum-Managing Director
	
	
(From 01.11.2025 to 02.01.2026)
Shri Manoj Kumar	
:	
Chairman-cum-Managing Director
	
	
(From 04.10.2021 to 31.10.2025)
Shri Ajay Kumar	
:	
Director (Technical) (From 26.10.2022)
Shri Rajeev Kumar Sinha	
:	
Director (Technical) (From 31.10.2025)
Shri Nripendra Nath	
:	
Director (Technical) (From 31.10.2025)
Shri Shankar Nagachari	
:	
Director (Technical) (From 02.09.2022 to 28.02.2026)
OFFICIAL PART–TIME DIRECTORS
Shri Mukesh Agrawal	
:	
Director (Finance), Coal India Limited (From 17.10.2024)
Shri Marapally Venkateshwarlu	
:	
Director (T/NA) Ministry of Coal (From 01.01.2025)	
CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER
Shri Sudip Dasgupta	
: 	
General Manager (Finance)/ CFO (From 01.10.2024)
COMPANY SECRETARY
Shri Abhishek Mundhra	
:	
Senior Manager (F) / Company Secretary & Compliance 
Officer (From 18.02.2016)


2
MEMBERS OF THE BOARD AS ON  17.08.2026     
FUNCTIONAL DIRECTORS
Shri Chaudhari Shivraj Singh	
:	
Chairman-cum-Managing Director
Shri Ajay Kumar	
:	
Director (Technical)
Shri Rajeev Kumar Sinha	
:	
Director (Technical)
Shri Nripendra Nath	
:	
Director (Technical)
Shri Anand Mohan	
:	
Director (Technical)
PART-TIME OFFICIAL DIRECTORS
Shri Mukesh Agrawal	
: 	
Director (Finance), Coal India Ltd., Kolkata
Shri Marapally Venkateshwarlu 	
: 	
Director (T/NA), Ministry of Coal
NON-OFFICIAL INDEPENDENT DIRECTORS
Shri Rajesh Davera	
: 	
Independent Director
Shri Anand Shekhar Singh 	
: 	
Independent Director
CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER	 	
	
Shri Sudip Dasgupta	
:	
General Manager (Finance)/ CFO
COMPANY SECRETARY	
	
	
Shri Abhishek Mundhra	
:	
Senior Manager (Finance) / Company Secretary 
 
 
& Compliance Officer



	
3
CORPORATE INFORMATION
REGISTERED OFFICE / CORPORATE OFFICE
Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Limited, 
Gondwana Place, Kanke Road,
Ranchi - 834 008 (Jharkhand), India
CIN: L14292 JH1975 GOI 001223
Website: www.cmpdi.co.in
BANKERS
STATE BANK OF INDIA
PUNJAB NATIONAL BANK
UNION BANK OF INDIA
BANK OF MAHARASHTRA
INDIAN BANK
BANK OF INDIA
CANARA BANK
ISIN
INE05HV01019 till 17.05.2025
INE05HV01027 from 17.05.2025
SHARES LISTED AT 
National Stock Exchange of India Limited (NSE) 
Bombay Stock Exchange Limited (BSE)
SCRIP CODE
National Stock Exchange of India Limited (NSE) 
- CMPDI
Bombay Stock Exchange Limited (BSE) - 544739
AUDITORS
STATUTORY AUDITOR
M/s Deoki Bijay & Co., Ranchi
SECRETARIAL AUDITOR
M/s Mahata Agarwal & Associates, Kolkata 
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE AUDITOR
M/s Mahata Agarwal & Associates, Kolkata
COST AUDITOR
M/s Shome & Banerjee, Kolkata
INTERNAL AUDITOR
M/s B. V. Rao & Co, Vishakhapatnam
M/s B. Rattan &Co, Chandigarh
M/s SRB & Associates, Bhubaneshwar
DEPOSITORY
M/s. National Security Depository Limited
M/s. Central Depository Services (India) Limited
REGISTRAR & SHARE TRANSFER AGENT
M/s. KFin Technologies Limited
BANK OF BARODA
UCO BANK
INDIAN OVERSEAS BANK
CENTRAL BANK OF INDIA
ICICI BANK
HDFC BANK
AXIS BANK
KOTAK MAHINDRA BANK


4
NOTICE FOR THE 51st ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING
Notice is hereby given to all the members of Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Limited that the 
51st Annual General Meeting of the Company will be held on Monday,17th August, 2026 at 04.00 
P.M. through Video Conferencing ("VC")/Other Audio Visual Means ("OAVM"), the Registered 
Office of the Company at Gondwana Place, Kanke Road, Ranchi being deemed to be the venue 
of the Meeting to transact the following business: -
A.	ORDINARY BUSINESS:
1.  To receive, consider and adopt the Standalone Audited Financial Statements of the 
Company for the financial year ended March 31, 2026.
 
To consider and if thought fit, to pass the following resolution as an Ordinary Resolution with 
or without modification (s):
	
RESOLVED THAT the Standalone Audited Financial Statements of the Company for the 
financial year ended March 31, 2026, including the Audited Balance Sheet as at March 31, 
2026, and the Statement of Profit & Loss for the year ended on that date, together with the 
Reports of the Board of Directors, the Statutory Auditors, and the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India thereon, be and are hereby received, considered and adopted.
2.	 To declare Final Dividend and to note the Interim Dividends already paid for the 
Financial Year 2025-26.
 
To consider and if thought fit, to pass the following resolutions as an Ordinary Resolution with 
or without modification (s):
	
RESOLVED THAT pursuant to Section 123 and other applicable provisions, if any, of the 
Companies Act, 2013, the Final Dividend of Rs. 1.06 per equity share (53%) of face value Rs. 
2/- each, as recommended by the Board of Directors for the Financial Year 2025-26, be and 
is hereby declared for payment to those Members whose names appear on the Company's 
Register of Members / list of Beneficial Owners as on the Record Date, i.e., 10th August 2026.
	
RESOLVED FURTHER THAT the Members do take note that the Board of Directors had, in 
exercise of its powers under Section 123(3) of the Companies Act, 2013, declared and paid 
the 1st, 2nd and 3rd Interim Dividends for the Financial Year 2025-26 @ Rs. 1.05 per equity 
share (52.5%) each, at its meetings held on 28th July 2025, 25th October 2025 and 20th 
January 2026 respectively, aggregating Rs. 3.15 per equity share (157.5%), which together 
with the Final Dividend now declared constitutes a total dividend of Rs. 4.21 per equity share 
(210.5%) for the Financial Year 2025-26 on equity shares of face value Rs. 2/- each, for the 
Financial Year 2025-26.
3.	 To appoint a Director in place of Shri Ajay Kumar (DIN: 09774347), Director (Technical), 
who retires by rotation.
 
To consider and if thought fit, to pass the following resolution as an Ordinary Resolution with 
or without modification (s):
	
RESOLVED THAT pursuant to Section 152(6) and other applicable provisions, if any, of the 
Companies Act, 2013, Shri Ajay Kumar (DIN: 09774347), Director (Technical), who retires by



	
5
rotation at this Annual General Meeting and, being eligible, has offered himself for re-appointment, 
be and is hereby re-appointed as a Director of the Company, liable to retire by rotation.
4.  To authorise the Board of Directors to fix the remuneration of the Statutory Auditors 
for FY 2025-26.
 
To consider and if thought fit, to pass the following resolutions as an Ordinary Resolution with 
or without modification (s):
	
RESOLVED THAT pursuant to Section 142 and other applicable provisions, if any, of the 
Companies Act, 2013, and pursuant to the appointment of M/s. Deoki Bijay & Co., Chartered 
Accountants, as Statutory Auditors of the Company for the Financial Year 2025-26 by the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India under Section 139(5) of the Companies Act, 2013, 
the Board of Directors be and is hereby authorised to fix the remuneration payable to the 
Statutory Auditors for the Financial Year 2025-26, in addition to out-of-pocket expenses and 
applicable taxes.
B.	 SPECIAL BUSINESS:
5.	 To appoint M/s. Mahata Agarwal & Associates as the Secretarial Auditors of the 
Company. 
 
To consider and if thought fit, to pass the following resolutions as an Ordinary Resolution with 
or without modification (s):   
	
RESOLVED THAT pursuant to the provisions of Regulation 24A & other applicable provisions 
of the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Listing Obligations and Disclosure Requirements) 
Regulations, 2015 (“SEBI Listing Regulations”) read with Circulars issued thereunder from 
time to time and Section 204 and other applicable provisions of the Companies Act, 2013, 
if any read with Rule 9 of the Companies (Appointment and Remuneration of Managerial 
Personnel) Rules, 2014 (“the Act”), M/s Mahata Agarwal & Associates, Practicing Company 
Secretaries (Firm Registration Number Unique No. P2021WB088100 & P.R. No. 5663/2024 ) 
as Secretarial Auditor of the Company for a term of five consecutive financial years, from F.Y. 
2025-26 till F.Y 2029-30 (‘the Term’), on such terms & conditions, including remuneration as 
approved by the Board of Directors based on the recommendation of the Audit Committee be 
and is hereby appointed.
	
RESOLVED FURTHER THAT approval of the Members is hereby accorded to the Board 
to avail or obtain from the Secretarial Auditor, such other services or certiﬁcates or reports 
which the Secretarial Auditor may be eligible to provide or issue under the applicable laws at 
a remuneration to be determined by the Board.
	
RESOLVED FURTHER THAT the Company Secretary be and is hereby authorized to do all 
such acts, deeds, matters and things and file all necessary forms and returns as per applicable 
provisions of Companies Act, 2013 read with Rules thereunder.”
6.	 To appoint Shri Anand Mohan as Director (Technical) of the Company. 
 
To consider and if thought fit, to pass the following resolutions as Ordinary Resolution with or 
without modification (s):   
	
“RESOLVED THAT pursuant to the provisions of Sections 152 and other applicable 
provisions of the Companies Act, 2013 and the rules made thereunder (including any statutory


6
modification(s) or re-enactment thereof for the time being in force) and provisions of any 
other guidelines issued by relevant authorities, Shri Anand Mohan (DIN: 11710864), who 
was appointed by the Board of Directors as an Additional Director of the Company with effect 
from 11th May 2026 and who holds office up to the date of this Annual General Meeting in 
terms of Section 161(1) of Companies Act, 2013 and in respect of whom the Company has 
received a notice in writing from a Member under Section 160(1) of the Companies Act, 2013 
proposing his candidature for the office of the Director, be and is hereby appointed as Director 
(Technical) of the Company w.e.f 11th May 2026 until the date of superannuation or until 
further orders, in terms of Ministry of Coal letter No. 21/13/2025- ESTABLISHMENT dated 7th 
May 2026. He is liable to retire by rotation.”
	
“RESOLVED FURTHER THAT the Company Secretary be and is hereby authorized to do 
all such acts, deeds, matters and things and file all necessary forms and returns as per 
applicable provisions of Companies Act, 2013 read with Rules thereunder.”
7.	 To appoint Shri Anand Shekhar Singh as Non - official Independent Director of the 
Company. 
 
To consider and if thought fit, to pass the following resolutions as Special Resolution with or 
without modification (s):   
	
"RESOLVED THAT pursuant to the provisions of Sections 149, 150, 152 read with Schedule 
IV and any other applicable provisions of the Companies Act, 2013 as amended from 
time to time and the rules made thereunder (including any statutory modification(s) or re-
enactment thereof for the time being in force) and SEBI (Listing Obligations and Disclosure 
Requirements) Regulations, 2015 and provisions of any other guidelines issued by relevant 
authorities, Shri Anand Shekhar Singh, (DIN: 02327730), who was appointed by the Board of 
Directors as an Additional Director in the capacity of an Independent Director with effect from 
15th July 2026 and who holds office up to the date of this Annual General Meeting in terms 
of Section 161(1) of Companies Act, 2013, who has submitted a declaration that he meets 
the criteria for independence as provided in Section 149(6) of the Act and Rules framed 
thereunder and Regulation 16(1)(b) of the SEBI Listing Regulations, as amended and in 
respect of whom the Company has received a notice in writing from a Member under Section 
160(1) of the Companies Act, 2013, proposing his candidature for the office of the Director, 
be and is hereby appointed as an Independent Director for a period of three consecutive 
years commencing from 15th July 2026 or until further orders, whichever is earlier in terms of 
Ministry of Coal letter no. 21/21/2022-Estt (B) dated 15th July’ 2026. He shall not be liable to 
retire by rotation.
	
“RESOLVED FURTHER THAT the Company Secretary be and is hereby authorized to do 
all such acts, deeds, matters and things and file all necessary forms and returns as per 
applicable provisions of Companies Act, 2013 read with Rules thereunder.”
8.	 To appoint Shri Rajesh Davera as the Non - official Independent Director of the Company. 
 
To consider and if thought fit, to pass the following resolutions as Special Resolution with or 
without modification (s):   
	
"RESOLVED THAT pursuant to the provisions of Sections 149, 150, 152 read with Schedule 
IV and any other applicable provisions of the Companies Act, 2013 as amended from



	
7
time to time and the rules made thereunder (including any statutory modification(s) or re-
enactment thereof for the time being in force) and SEBI (Listing Obligations and Disclosure 
Requirements) Regulations, 2015 and provisions of any other guidelines issued by relevant 
authorities, Shri Rajesh Davera, (DIN: 11828075), who was appointed by the Board of 
Directors as an Additional Director in the capacity of an Independent Director with effect from 
15th July 2026 and who holds office up to the date of this Annual General Meeting in terms 
of Section 161(1) of Companies Act, 2013, who has submitted a declaration that he meets 
the criteria for independence as provided in Section 149(6) of the Act and Rules framed 
thereunder and Regulation 16(1)(b) of the SEBI Listing Regulations, as amended and in 
respect of whom the Company has received a notice in writing from a Member under Section 
160(1) of the Companies Act, 2013, proposing his candidature for the office of the Director, 
be and is hereby appointed as an Independent Director for a period of three consecutive 
years commencing from 15th July 2026 or until further orders, whichever is earlier in terms of 
Ministry of Coal letter no. 21/21/2022-Estt (B) dated 15th July 2026. He shall not be liable to 
retire by rotation.
	
“RESOLVED FURTHER THAT the Company Secretary be and is hereby authorized to do 
all such acts, deeds, matters and things and file all necessary forms and returns as per 
applicable provisions of Companies Act, 2013 read with Rules thereunder.”
	
By Order of the Board of Directors
	
For Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Limited
	
Sd/-
	
(Abhishek Mundhra)
 
Company Secretary & Compliance Officer
Date	 :	 25.07.2026
Place	 :	 Ranchi


8
Notes:- 
1.	
Pursuant to the General Circular No. 03/2025 dated September 22, 2025, issued by the Ministry 
of Corporate Affairs (MCA) read with other applicable circulars and notifications issued (including 
any statutory modifications or re-enactment thereof for the time being in force and as amended 
from time to time), companies are allowed to hold AGM through Video Conferencing (VC) or 
other audio visual means (OAVM), without the physical presence of members at a common 
venue. In compliance with the said Circulars, AGM shall be conducted through VC / OAVM at 
the Registered Office of the Company i.e CMPDI HQ, Gondwana Place, Kanke Road, Ranchi 
– 834008 and the Notice of this AGM and the Directors’ Report and Accounts for FY 2025-26 
are being sent only through electronic mode to those members who have registered their e-mail 
addresses with the Depositories/Company/RTA.
2.	
Pursuant to the Circular No. 14/2020 dated April 08, 2020, issued by the Ministry of Corporate 
Affairs, the facility to appoint proxy to attend and cast vote for the members is not available for 
this AGM. However, the Body Corporates are entitled to appoint authorised representatives to 
attend the AGM through VC/OAVM and participate there at and cast their votes through e-voting.
3.	
The attendance of the Members attending the AGM through VC/OAVM will be counted for the 
purpose of reckoning the quorum under Section 103 of the Companies Act, 2013.
4.	
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 108 of the Companies Act, 2013 read with Rule 20 of the 
Companies (Management and Administration) Rules, 2014 (as amended),and  the Secretarial 
Standard on General Meetings (SS-2) issued by the ICSI and Regulation 44 of SEBI (Listing 
Obligations & Disclosure Requirements) Regulations 2015 (as amended), and the Circulars 
issued by the Ministry of Corporate Affairs from time to time the Company is providing facility 
of remote e-Voting to its Members in respect of the business to be transacted at the AGM. For 
this purpose, the Company has entered into an agreement with National Securities Depository 
Limited (NSDL) for facilitating voting through electronic means, as the authorized agency. The 
facility of casting votes by a member using remote e-Voting system as well as e-voting on the 
date of the AGM will be provided by NSDL. Information and instructions relating to e-voting is 
annexed herewith.
5.	
The Board of Directors of our company at its meeting held on 28th July 2025, 25th October 2025 
and 20th January 2026 respectively had declared 1st Interim dividend @ Rs. 1.05 per share 
(52.50%), 2nd Interim Dividend @ Rs. 1.05 per share (52.50%) and 3rd Interim Dividend @ Rs. 
1.05 per share (52.5%) on the paid-up equity share capital of the company which was paid in July 
2025, October 2025 and January 2026 respectively.
	
The Final dividend on equity shares, as recommended by the Board of Directors at its meeting 
held on 21st April 2026, if declared at the Annual General Meeting, will be paid within 30 days 
of approval in the AGM as per Companies Act, 2013 to the Members or their mandates whose 
names appear in the Company’s Register of Members on 10th August 2026, the Record date.
6.	
Item No. 3 of the Notice relates to the re-appointment of Shri Ajay Kumar (DIN: 09774347), Director 
(Technical), who retires by rotation and, being eligible, has offered himself for re-appointment.
	
Brief Profile: -  Shri Ajay Kumar assumed charge as Director (Technical) of CMPDIL on 26th 
October, 2022. A Mining Engineering graduate from IIT (ISM), Dhanbad, he has over three 
decades of rich and varied experience in the coal mining sector. During his distinguished career, 
he has served in key positions in Central Coalfields Limited (CCL), CMPDIL, CMPDIL Regional



	
9
Institute-V, Bilaspur and NTPC Limited. He is also a holder of the First Class Mine Manager's 
Certificate of Competency and has represented the Company in international technical forums 
and official visits abroad, acquiring valuable exposure to advanced mining technologies and 
practices.
7.	
Pursuant to Section 143(5) of the Companies Act, 2013, the Auditors of a Government Company 
are to be appointed or re-appointed by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (C & AG) 
under Section 139 (5) of Companies Act, 2013 and in terms of sub section (1) of Section 142 
of the Companies Act, 2013 their remuneration has to be fixed by the Company in the Annual 
General Meeting or in such manner as the Company in General Meeting may determine. M/s 
Deoki Bijay & Co., Chartered Accountants Firm were appointed as Statutory Auditors of the 
Company by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the Financial year 2025-26.
8.	
The Register of Directors, Key Managerial Personnel and their shareholding maintained under 
Section 170 of the Companies Act, 2013, will be available for inspection by the members 
electronically at the AGM.
9.	
The Register of Contracts or Arrangements, in which Directors are interested, maintained under 
Section 189 of Companies Act, 2013, will be available for inspection by the members electronically 
at the AGM.
	
All documents referred to in the accompanying notice are open for inspection at the AGM and 
such documents will also be available for inspection in physical or in electronic form at the 
Registered office of the Company and copies thereof shall also be available for inspection at the 
Registered office of the Company during normal business hours on working days from 10:00 AM 
to 05:00 PM from the date of circulation of this Notice up to the date of AGM i.e. Monday, the 17th 
August, 2026. 
10.	 The Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) has mandated the submission of a Permanent 
Account Number (PAN) by every participant in the securities market. Members holding shares in 
electronic form are, therefore, requested to submit their PAN to their Depository Participant with 
whom they are maintaining their Demat accounts. 
11.	 The Explanatory Statement according to Section 102(1) of the Companies Act, 2013 in respect of 
Special businesses is annexed herewith. The relevant details of Directors seeking re-appointment/
appointment forms part of the Notice as required under Regulation 36(3) of Securities and 
Exchange Board of India (Listing Obligations and Disclosure Requirements) Regulations, 2015, 
(“Listing Regulations”).
12.	 Members are requested to address all correspondences, to our Registrar and Share Transfer 
Agents on the following address and email ids.:
	
KFin Technologies Ltd.
	
Unit: CENTRAL MINE PLANNING AND DESIGN INSTITUTE LIMITED
	
Selenium Building, Tower B, Plot 31-32, Gachibowli, 
Financial District, Nanakramguda, Serelingampally, 
Hyderabad, Rangareddi, Telangana - 500 032.
 
einward.ris@kfintech.com
13.	 The Members can join the AGM in the VC/OAVM mode 15 minutes before and after the scheduled 
time of the commencement of the Meeting by following the procedure mentioned in the Notice.


10
The facility of participation at the AGM through VC/OAVM will be made available for 1000 
members on first come first served basis. This will not include large Shareholders (Shareholders 
holding 2% or more shareholding), Promoters, Institutional Investors, Directors, Key Managerial 
Personnel, the Chairpersons of the Audit Committee, Nomination and Remuneration Committee 
and Stakeholders Relationship Committee, Auditors etc. who are allowed to attend the AGM 
without restriction on account of first come first served basis.
14.	 In line with the Ministry of Corporate Affairs (MCA) Circular No. 17/2020 dated April 13, 2020, the 
Notice calling the AGM has been uploaded on the website of the Company at https://www.cmpdi.
co.in/en/investor-relation/financials-and-secretarial-matters. The Notice can also be accessed 
from the websites of the Stock Exchanges i.e. BSE Limited and National Stock Exchange of India 
Limited at www.bseindia.com and www.nseindia.com respectively and the AGM Notice is also 
available on the website of NSDL (agency for providing the Remote e-Voting facility) i.e. www.
evoting.nsdl.com.
15.	 The Company has appointed M/s. Mahata Agarwal & Associates, Company Secretaries as the 
Scrutinizer to conduct the e-voting process in a fair and transparent manner.



	
11
THE INSTRUCTIONS FOR MEMBERS FOR REMOTE E-VOTING AND JOINING GENERAL 
MEETING ARE AS UNDER:-
The remote e-voting period begins on 14th August 2026 at 09:00A.M. and ends on 16th August 2026 at 
05:00 P.M. The remote e-voting module shall be disabled by NSDL for voting thereafter. The Members, 
whose names appear in the Register of Members / Beneficial Owners as on the record date (cut-off 
date) i.e. 10th August 2026, may cast their vote electronically. The voting right of shareholders shall be 
in proportion to their share in the paid-up equity share capital of the Company as on the cut-off date, 
being 10th August 2026.
How do I vote electronically using NSDL e-Voting system?
The way to vote electronically on NSDL e-Voting system consists of “Two Steps” which are mentioned below:
Step 1: Access to NSDL e-Voting system
A) Login method for e-Voting and joining virtual meeting for Individual shareholders holding 
securities in demat mode
In terms of SEBI circular dated December 9, 2020 on e-Voting facility provided by Listed Companies, 
Individual shareholders holding securities in demat mode are allowed to vote through their demat 
account maintained with Depositories and Depository Participants. Shareholders are advised to 
update their mobile number and email Id in their demat accounts in order to access e-Voting facility.
Login method for Individual shareholders holding securities in demat mode is given below:
Type of 
shareholders
 Login Method
Individual 
Shareholders 
holding 
securities in 
demat mode 
with NSDL.
1.	 For OTP based login you can click on https://eservices.nsdl.com/SecureWeb/
evoting/evotinglogin.jsp. You will have to enter your 8-digit DP ID,8-digit Client 
Id, PAN No., Verification code and generate OTP. Enter the OTP received 
on registered email id/mobile number and click on login. After successful 
authentication, you will be redirected to NSDL Depository site wherein you 
can see e-Voting page. Click on company name or e-Voting service provider 
i.e. NSDL and you will be redirected to e-Voting website of NSDL for casting 
your vote during the remote e-Voting period or joining virtual meeting & voting 
during the meeting.
2.	 Existing IDeAS user can visit the e-Services website of NSDL Viz. https://
eservices.nsdl.com either on a Personal Computer or on a mobile. On the 
e-Services home page click on the “Beneficial Owner” icon under “Login” 
which is available under ‘IDeAS’ section , this will prompt you to enter your 
existing User ID and Password. After successful authentication, you will be 
able to see e-Voting services under Value added services. Click on “Access to 
e-Voting” under e-Voting services and you will be able to see e-Voting page. 
Click on company name or e-Voting service provider i.e. NSDL and you will 
be re-directed to e-Voting website of NSDL for casting your vote during the 
remote e-Voting period or joining virtual meeting & voting during the meeting.
3.	 If you are not registered for IDeAS e-Services, option to register is available 
at https://eservices.nsdl.com.  Select “Register Online for IDeAS Portal” or 
click at https://eservices.nsdl.com/SecureWeb/IdeasDirectReg.jsp


12
4.	 Visit the e-Voting website of NSDL. Open web browser by typing the following 
URL: https://www.evoting.nsdl.com/ either on a Personal Computer or on a 
mobile. Once the home page of e-Voting system is launched, click on the icon 
“Login” which is available under ‘Shareholder/Member’ section. A new screen 
will open. You will have to enter your User ID (i.e. your sixteen digit demat 
account number hold with NSDL), Password/OTP and a Verification Code as 
shown on the screen. After successful authentication, you will be redirected to 
NSDL Depository site wherein you can see e-Voting page. Click on company 
name or e-Voting service provider i.e. NSDL and you will be redirected to 
e-Voting website of NSDL for casting your vote during the remote e-Voting 
period or joining virtual meeting & voting during the meeting.	
5.	 Shareholders/Members can also download NSDL Mobile App “NSDL Speede” 
facility by scanning the QR code mentioned below for seamless voting 
experience.
Individual 
Shareholders 
holding 
securities in 
Demat mode 
with CDSL
1.	 Users who have opted for CDSL Easi / Easiest facility, can login through their 
existing user id and password. Option will be made available to reach e-Voting 
page without any further authentication. The users to login Easi /Easiest are 
requested to visit CDSL website www.cdslindia.com and click on login icon 
& New System Myeasi Tab and then user your existing my easi username & 
password.
2.	 After successful login the Easi / Easiest user will be able to see the e-Voting 
option for eligible companies where the evoting is in progress as per the 
information provided by company. On clicking the evoting option, the user 
will be able to see e-Voting page of the e-Voting service provider for casting 
your vote during the remote e-Voting period or joining virtual meeting & voting 
during the meeting. Additionally, there is also links provided to access the 
system of all e-Voting Service Providers, so that the user can visit the e-Voting 
service providers’ website directly.
3.	 If the user is not registered for Easi/Easiest, option to register is available at 
CDSL website www.cdslindia.com and click on login & New System Myeasi 
Tab and then click on registration option.



	
13
4.	 Alternatively, the user can directly access e-Voting page by providing Demat 
Account Number and PAN No. from a e-Voting link available on www.cdslindia.
com home page. The system will authenticate the user by sending OTP on 
registered Mobile & Email as recorded in the Demat Account. After successful 
authentication, user will be able to see the e-Voting option where the evoting is 
in progress and also able to directly access the system of all e-Voting Service 
Providers.
Individual 
Shareholders 
(holding 
securities in 
demat mode) 
login through 
their depository 
participants
You can also login using the login credentials of your demat account through 
your Depository Participant registered with NSDL/CDSL for e-Voting facility. upon 
logging in, you will be able to see e-Voting option. Click on e-Voting option, you 
will be redirected to NSDL/CDSL Depository site after successful authentication, 
wherein you can see e-Voting feature. Click on company name or e-Voting service 
provider i.e. NSDL and you will be redirected to e-Voting website of NSDL for 
casting your vote during the remote e-Voting period or joining virtual meeting & 
voting during the meeting.
Important note: Members who are unable to retrieve User ID/ Password are advised to use Forget 
User ID and Forget Password option available at abovementioned website.
Helpdesk for Individual Shareholders holding securities in demat mode for any 
technical issues related to login through Depository i.e. NSDL and CDSL.
Login type
Helpdesk details
Individual 
Shareholders 
holding 
securities in demat mode with NSDL
Members facing any technical issue in login can contact 
NSDL helpdesk by sending a request at  evoting@nsdl.com 
or call at 022 - 4886 7000
Individual Shareholders holding 
securities in demat mode with CDSL
Members facing any technical issue in login can contact 
CDSL helpdesk by sending a request at helpdesk.evoting@
cdslindia.com or contact at toll free no. 1800-21-09911
B) Login Method for e-Voting and joining virtual meeting for shareholders other than Individual 
shareholders holding securities in demat mode and shareholders holding securities in 
physical mode.
How to Log-in to NSDL e-Voting website?
1.	 Visit the e-Voting website of NSDL. Open web browser by typing the following URL: https://www.
evoting.nsdl.com/ either on a Personal Computer or on a mobile. 
2.	 Once the home page of e-Voting system is launched, click on the icon “Login” which is available 
under ‘Shareholder/Member’ section.
3. A new screen will open. You will have to enter your User ID, your Password/OTP and a Verification 
Code as shown on the screen.
Alternatively, if you are registered for NSDL eservices i.e. IDEAS, you can log-in at https://eservices.
nsdl.com/ with your existing IDEAS login. Once you log-in to NSDL eservices after using your log-in 
credentials, click on e-Voting and you can proceed to Step 2 i.e. Cast your vote electronically.


14
4.	 Your User ID details are given below :
Manner of holding shares i.e. 
Demat (NSDL or CDSL) or Physical
 Your User ID is:
a) For Members who hold shares in 
demat account with NSDL.
8 Character DP ID followed by 8 Digit Client ID
For example if your DP ID is IN300*** and Client ID is 
12****** then your user ID is IN300***12******.
b) For Members who hold shares in 
demat account with CDSL.
16 Digit Beneficiary ID
For example if your Beneficiary ID is 12************** then 
your user ID is 12**************
c) For Members holding shares in 
Physical Form.
EVEN Number followed by Folio Number registered with 
the company
For example if folio number is 001*** and EVEN is 101456 
then user ID is 101456001***
5.	 Password details for shareholders other than Individual shareholders are given below: 
a)	 If you are already registered for e-Voting, then you can user your existing password to login 
and cast your vote.
b) If you are using NSDL e-Voting system for the first time, you will need to retrieve the ‘initial 
password’ which was communicated to you. Once you retrieve your ‘initial password’, you 
need to enter the ‘initial password’ and the system will force you to change your password.
c)	 How to retrieve your ‘initial password’?
(i)	 If your email ID is registered in your demat account or with the company, your ‘initial 
password’ is communicated to you on your email ID. Trace the email sent to you from 
NSDL from your mailbox. Open the email and open the attachment i.e. a .pdf file. Open 
the .pdf file. The password to open the .pdf file is your 8-digit client ID for NSDL account, 
last 8 digits of client ID for CDSL account or folio number for shares held in physical form. 
The .pdf file contains your ‘User ID’ and your ‘initial password’. 
(ii)	 If your email ID is not registered, please follow steps mentioned below in process for 
those shareholders whose email ids are not registered. 
6.	 If you are unable to retrieve or have not received the “Initial password” or have forgotten your password:
a)	 Click on “Forgot User Details/Password?”(If you are holding shares in your demat account 
with NSDL or CDSL) option available on www.evoting.nsdl.com.
b)	 Physical User Reset Password?” (If you are holding shares in physical mode) option avail-
able on www.evoting.nsdl.com.
c)	 If you are still unable to get the password by aforesaid two options, you can send a request 
at evoting@nsdl.com mentioning your demat account number/folio number, your PAN, your 
name and your registered address etc.
d)	 Members can also use the OTP (One Time Password) based login for casting the votes on 
the e-Voting system of NSDL.
7.	 After entering your password, tick on Agree to “Terms and Conditions” by selecting on the check box.
8.	 Now, you will have to click on “Login” button.
9.	 After you click on the “Login” button, Home page of e-Voting will open.



	
15
Step 2: Cast your vote electronically and join General Meeting on NSDL e-Voting system.
How to cast your vote electronically and join General Meeting on NSDL e-Voting system?
1.	 After successful login at Step 1, you will be able to see all the companies “EVEN” in which you 
are holding shares and whose voting cycle and General Meeting is in active status.
2.	 Select “EVEN” of company for which you wish to cast your vote during the remote e-Voting 
period and casting your vote during the General Meeting. For joining virtual meeting, you need 
to click on “VC/OAVM” link placed under “Join Meeting”.
3.	 Now you are ready for e-Voting as the Voting page opens.
4.	 Cast your vote by selecting appropriate options i.e. assent or dissent, verify/modify the number of 
shares for which you wish to cast your vote and click on “Submit” and also “Confirm” when prompted.
5. Upon confirmation, the message “Vote cast successfully” will be displayed. 
6.	 You can also take the printout of the votes cast by you by clicking on the print option on the 
confirmation page.
7. Once you confirm your vote on the resolution, you will not be allowed to modify your vote.
General Guidelines for shareholders
1.	 Institutional shareholders (i.e. other than individuals, HUF, NRI etc.) are required to send 
scanned copy (PDF/JPG Format) of the relevant Board Resolution/ Authority letter etc. with 
attested specimen signature of the duly authorized signatory(ies) who are authorized to vote, to 
the Scrutinizer by e-mail to ssmahataassociates@gmail.com  with a copy marked to evoting@
nsdl.com. Institutional shareholders (i.e. other than individuals, HUF, NRI etc.) can also upload 
their Board Resolution / Power of Attorney / Authority Letter etc. by clicking on "Upload Board 
Resolution / Authority Letter" displayed under "e-Voting" tab in their login.
2.	 It is strongly recommended not to share your password with any other person and take utmost 
care to keep your password confidential. Login to the e-voting website will be disabled upon 
five unsuccessful attempts to key in the correct password. In such an event, you will need to 
go through the “Forgot User Details/Password?” or “Physical User Reset Password?” option 
available on www.evoting.nsdl.com to reset the password. 
3. In case of any queries, you may refer the Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) for Shareholders 
and e-voting user manual for Shareholders available at the download section of www.evoting.
nsdl.com or call on.: 022 - 4886 7000 or send a request to Mr. Pritam Dutta, Senior Manager at 
pritamd@nsdl.com / evoting@nsdl.com 
Process for those shareholders whose email ids are not registered with the depositories for 
procuring user id and password and registration of e mail ids for e-voting for the resolutions 
set out in this notice:
1.	 In case shares are held in demat mode, please provide DPID-CLID (16 digit DPID + CLID or 16 
digit beneficiary ID), Name, client master or copy of Consolidated Account statement, PAN (self 
attested scanned copy of PAN card), AADHAR (self attested scanned copy of Aadhar Card) to 
complianceoff.cmpdi@coalindia.in.  If you are an Individual shareholders holding securities in 
demat mode, you are requested to refer to the login method explained at step 1 (A) i.e. Login 
method for e-Voting and joining virtual meeting for Individual shareholders holding 
securities in demat mode.


16
2.	 Alternatively shareholder/members may send a request to evoting@nsdl.com for procuring user 
id and password for e-voting by providing above mentioned documents.
3.	 In terms of SEBI circular dated December 9, 2020 on e-Voting facility provided by Listed Companies, 
Individual shareholders holding securities in demat mode are allowed to vote through their demat 
account maintained with Depositories and Depository Participants. Shareholders are required to 
update their mobile number and email ID correctly in their demat account in order to access 
e-Voting facility.
THE INSTRUCTIONS FOR MEMBERS FOR e-VOTING ON THE DAY OF THE AGM ARE 
AS UNDER:-
1.	 The procedure for e-Voting on the day of the AGM is same as the instructions mentioned above 
for remote e-voting.
2.	 Only those Members/ shareholders, who will be present in the AGM through VC/OAVM facility 
and have not casted their vote on the Resolutions through remote e-Voting and are otherwise not 
barred from doing so, shall be eligible to vote through e-Voting system in the AGM.
3.	 Members who have voted through Remote e-Voting will be eligible to attend the AGM. However, 
they will not be eligible to vote at the AGM.
4.	 The details of the person who may be contacted for any grievances connected with the facility for 
e-Voting on the day of the AGM shall be the same person mentioned for Remote e-voting.
INSTRUCTIONS FOR MEMBERS FOR ATTENDING THE AGM THROUGH VC/OAVM ARE 
AS UNDER:
1.	 Member will be provided with a facility to attend the AGM through VC/OAVM through the NSDL 
e-Voting system. Members may access by following the steps mentioned above for Access to 
NSDL e-Voting system. After successful login, you can see link of “VC/OAVM” placed under 
“Join meeting” menu against company name. You are requested to click on VC/OAVM link 
placed under Join Meeting menu. The link for VC/OAVM will be available in Shareholder/Member 
login where the EVEN of Company will be displayed. Please note that the members who do not 
have the User ID and Password for e-Voting or have forgotten the User ID and Password may 
retrieve the same by following the remote e-Voting instructions mentioned in the notice to avoid 
last minute rush.
 2.	 Members are encouraged to join the Meeting through Laptops for better experience.
3.	 Further Members will be required to allow Camera and use Internet with a good speed to avoid 
any disturbance during the meeting.
4.	 Please note that Participants Connecting from Mobile Devices or Tablets or through Laptop 
connecting via Mobile Hotspot may experience Audio/Video loss due to Fluctuation in their 
respective network. It is therefore recommended to use Stable Wi-Fi or LAN Connection to mitigate 
any kind of aforesaid glitches.
5.	 Shareholders who would like to express their views/have questions may send their questions in 
advance mentioning their name demat account number/folio number, email id, mobile number at 
complianceoff.cmpdi@coalindia.in. The same will be replied by the company suitably.



	
17
6.	 Shareholders who would like to express their views/ask questions as a speaker at the Meeting 
may pre-register themselves by sending a request from their registered e-mail address mentioning 
their names, DP ID and Client ID/folio number, PAN and mobile number at complianceoff.cmpdi@
coalindia.in between 11th August, 2026 09:00 a.m. (IST) and 14th August, 2026, 05:00 p.m. (IST). 
Only those Shareholders who have pre-registered themselves as a speaker will be allowed to 
express their views/ask questions during the AGM. The Company reserves the right to restrict the 
number of speakers depending on the availability of time for the AGM.
Explanatory Statement pursuant to Section 102(1) of Companies Act, 2013
The following Statement sets out all material facts relating to Special Business mentioned in the 
accompanying Notice:
Item No. B (5): To appoint M/s. Mahata Agarwal & Associates as the Secretarial Auditors 
of the Company.
Pursuant to the Regulation 24A and other applicable provisions of the Securities and Exchange 
Board of India (Listing Obligations and Disclosure Requirements) Regulations, 2015 (“SEBI Listing 
Regulations”) read with provisions of Section 204 read with Rule 9 of the Companies (Appointment 
and Remuneration of Managerial Personnel) Rules, 2014 and other applicable provisions of the 
Companies Act, 2013, if any (“the Act”), the Audit Committee and the Board of Directors at their 
respective meetings both held on 20th May 2026 have approved subject to approval of Members, 
appointment of M/s. Mahata Agarwal & Associates, a Peer Reviewed Firm of Company Secretaries 
in Practice (Firm Registration Number:P2021WB088100) as Secretarial Auditors for term of five 
consecutive financial years, from F.Y. 2025-26 till F.Y 2029-30 (both years inclusive). 
Credentials of the Secretarial Auditor:
Mr. Sumantra Sarathi Mahata is the Founder Partner of M/s. Mahata Agarwal & Associates, Peer 
Reviewed Company Secretaries. The firm provides services in the field of NCLT proceedings, FEMA 
Compliances, Merger demerger arrangements, Secretarial Audit, Due Diligence etc. The firm has 
a team of skilled professionals and has significant experience with many PSUs, Banks and private 
sector companies.
M/s. Mahata Agarwal & Associates, have consented to the said appointment and confirmed that their 
appointment, if ratified, would be within the limits specified by the Institute of Company Secretaries 
of India. They have further confirmed that they are not disqualified to be appointed as Secretarial 
Auditors in term of provisions of the Companies Act, 2013, the Company Secretaries Act, 1980 and 
Rules and Regulations made thereunder and the SEBI Listing Regulations read with SEBI Circular 
dated December 31, 2024.
Terms and conditions of appointment & remuneration:
a)  Term of appointment: Five consecutive financial years, from F.Y. 2025-26 till F.Y 2029-30.
b)  Remuneration: Total of ₹1,12,094.10/- (including GST @18%) (Rupees One Lakhs Twelve 
Thousand Ninety-four rupees and ten paisa only) for five consecutive financial years from F.Y. 
2025-26 till F.Y 2029-30 and out-of-pocket expenses at actuals, subject to maximum of 50% of the 
Audit fees plus applicable taxes.


18
Basis of recommendations:
The Audit Committee and the Board of Directors have approved and recommended the aforementioned 
proposal for approval of Members taking into account the eligibility and expertise of the firm in providing 
Secretarial audit related services.
No director, key managerial personnel or their relatives, is interested or concerned financially or 
otherwise in the resolution. The Board recommends the resolution set forth in Item No. 5 for the 
approval of the members.
Item No. B (6): To appoint Shri Anand Mohan as the Director (Technical) of the Company.
The Board of Directors had appointed Shri Anand Mohan (DIN- 11710864), Director (Technical) as an 
Additional Director on the Board of CMPDIL.
The Company has received a notice in writing under the provisions of Section 160 of the Companies 
Act, 2013 as amended, from a member proposing the candidature of Shri Anand Mohan, as a Director, 
to be appointed as such under the provisions of Section 152 of the Companies Act, 2013. The Company 
has received from him (i) consent in writing to act as director in Form DIR 2 pursuant to Rule 8 of the 
Companies (Appointment & Qualification of Directors) Rules, 2014, (ii) intimation in Form DIR 8 in 
terms of Companies (Appointment & Qualification of Directors) Rules, 2014, to the effect that he is 
not disqualified under sub section (2) of Section 164 of the Companies Act, 2013 and that he is not 
debarred by SEBI or any other authority from being appointed or continuing as a Director of a company. 
The approval of members is further sought for the appointment of Shri Anand Mohan (DIN: 11710864), 
Director (Technical) of the Company w.e.f. 11th May 2026 till date of his superannuation or until further 
orders in terms of Ministry of Coal letter no No. 21/13/2025-ESTABLISHMENT dated 07.05.2026. He 
is liable to retire by rotation.
a)	 Brief Resume- Shri Anand Mohan (DIN: 11710864) assumed charge as Director (Technical) of 
Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Limited (CMPDIL) on 11 May 2026. Prior to joining CMPDIL, 
he held several key positions in Northern Coalfields Limited (NCL), Central Coalfields Limited (CCL) 
and Coal India Limited (CIL), where he successfully discharged various important responsibilities. 
Shri Mohan obtained his Bachelor's Degree in Mining Engineering from Karnataka Regional 
Engineering College (KREC), Surathkal (now National Institute of Technology, Surathkal) in 1989 
and commenced his professional career in the same year at Amlohri Project of Northern Coalfields 
Limited (NCL). Subsequently, in 2005, he earned a Master of Technology (M.Tech.) in Surface 
Mining Engineering from the Indian School of Mines (ISM), Dhanbad (now IIT (ISM) Dhanbad). 
He has also participated in several prestigious international training programmes, including the 
ODA Programme on Environmental Assessment and Management conducted by the University 
of Wales, United Kingdom, in 1996, as well as advanced global management programmes. He 
was also a member of the Indian delegation for the Advanced Global Technology & Management 
Programme (AGTMP-2023) conducted across various European countries.Shri Mohan is a Fellow 
of the Institution of Engineers (India) (FIE) and a Life Member of the Mining, Geological and 
Metallurgical Institute of India (MGMI) and the Mining Engineers' Association of India (MEAI). 
b)	 Nature of expertise in specific functional areas- Coal mining sector, particularly in the 
areas of mine planning, mining operations, project management, rehabilitation and resettlement, 
environmental management, and digital transformation.



	
19
c)	 Disclosure of relationships between directors- He is not related to any other Director of 
CMPDIL.
d)	 He does not hold the directorship and the membership of committees of the board in any listed 
company and has also not resigned in the past three years.
e)	 No Director, Key managerial personnel or their relatives, except Shri Anand Mohan to whom the 
resolution relates, is interested or concerned financially or otherwise in the resolution. The Board 
recommends the resolution set forth in Item No B (6) for the approval of the members.
Item No. B (7): To appoint Shri Anand Shekhar Singh as Non - official Independent 
Director of the Company. 
The Board of Directors had appointed Shri Anand Shekhar Singh, (DIN: 02327730) as non-official 
Independent Director on the Board of CMPDIL with effect from 15th July 2026, to hold office up to the 
date of the ensuing AGM of the Company or the last date on which the AGM should have been held, 
whichever is earlier and passed the following resolutions:
"RESOLVED THAT pursuant to Section 161(1), Section 149 and other applicable provisions of the 
Companies Act, 2013, read with Article-31(e) the Articles of Association of the Company, and pursuant 
to the Order of the Ministry of Coal, Government of India, appointing Shri Rajesh Davera and Shri Anand 
Shekhar Singh as Non-Official Independent Directors on the Board of CMPDI Limited with effect from 
15.07.2026, Shri Rajesh Davera (DIN:11828075) and Shri Anand Shekhar Singh (DIN:02327730) be 
and are hereby appointed as Additional Directors (Independent Category) of the Company with effect 
from 15.07.2026, to hold office up to the date of the ensuing AGM of the Company or the last date on 
which the AGM should have been held, whichever is earlier.”
"RESOLVED FURTHER THAT the declarations received from Shri Rajesh Davera and Shri Anand 
Shekhar Singh under Section 149(7) of the Companies Act, 2013 and Regulation 25(8) of the SEBI 
(LODR) Regulations, 2015, confirming that they meet the criteria of independence, be and are hereby 
taken on record."
The Company has received a notice in writing under Section 160 of the Companies Act, 2013 as amended 
from a member proposing the candidature of Shri Anand Shekhar Singh as a director, to be appointed 
as such under the provisions of Section 149 of the Companies Act, 2013. The Company has received 
from him (i) consent in writing to act as director in Form DIR-2 pursuant to Rule 8 of the Companies 
(Appointment & Qualification of Directors) Rules, 2014, (ii) intimation in Form DIR-8 in terms of Companies 
(Appointment & Qualification of Directors) Rules, 2014, to the effect that he is not disqualified under sub 
section (2) of Section 164 of the Companies Act,2013. He has also given the Declaration of Independence. 
The resolution seeks the approval of members for the appointment of Shri Anand Shekhar Singh as an 
Independent Director of the Company from 15th July, 2026 and until further orders in terms of Ministry of 
Coal letter no. 21/21/2022- Estt (B) dated 15th July, 2026. He is not liable to retire by rotation.
a)	 Brief Resume- Shri Anand Shekhar Singh (DIN: 02327730) is an accomplished entrepreneur, 
educationist, industrialist and social contributor with more than two decades of distinguished 
experience in education, pharmaceutical manufacturing, administration and corporate governance. 
He has been appointed as Non-Official Independent Director on the Board of Central Mine Planning 
& Design Institute Limited (CMPDIL) on 15th July 2026. He obtained his M.Tech. in Mechanical 
Engineering from Moscow State Mining University, Moscow, Russia (1994) and MBA (Marketing) 
from the Russian Academy of Economics, Moscow, Russia (1995), combining technical excellence 
with strong managerial capabilities. As Chairman of the Babu Sunder Singh Education and Research


20
Foundation, he has led initiatives in higher education, skill development, healthcare, social welfare 
and employment generation, establishing and managing engineering, pharmacy, degree, diploma 
and skill development institutions. Since 2013, as Director of S K Meditech Private Limited, he has 
provided strategic leadership in pharmaceutical manufacturing and exports.
b)	 Nature of expertise in specific functional areas- management, administration, technical 
operations, corporate governance, research, sales and marketing.
c)	 Disclosure of relationships between directors- He is not related to any other Director of 
CMPDIL.
d)	 He does not hold the directorship and the membership of committees of the board in any listed 
company and has also not resigned in the past three years.
e)	 No Director, Key managerial personnel or their relatives, except Shri Anand Shekhar Singh to 
whom the resolution relates, is interested or concerned financially or otherwise in the resolution. No 
remuneration other than sitting fees is being paid to him for attending Board/ Committee Meetings. 
The Board of Directors considered that in view of the background and experience of Shri Anand 
Shekhar Singh, it would be in the interest of the company to appoint him as an Independent 
Director of the Company. The Board recommends the special resolution set forth in Item No. B (7) 
for the approval of the members.
Item No. B (8): To appoint Shri Rajesh Davera as Non - official Independent Director of 
the Company. 
The Board of Directors had appointed Shri Rajesh Davera, (DIN: 11828075) as non-official Independent 
Director on the Board of CMPDIL with effect from 15th July 2026, to hold office up to the date of the 
ensuing AGM of the Company or the last date on which the AGM should have been held, whichever 
is earlier and passed the following resolutions:
"RESOLVED THAT pursuant to Section 161(1), Section 149 and other applicable provisions of the 
Companies Act, 2013, read with Article-31(e) the Articles of Association of the Company, and pursuant 
to the Order of the Ministry of Coal, Government of India, appointing Shri Rajesh Davera and Shri Anand 
Shekhar Singh as Non-Official Independent Directors on the Board of CMPDI Limited with effect from 
15.07.2026, Shri Rajesh Davera (DIN:11828075) and Shri Anand Shekhar Singh (DIN:02327730) be 
and are hereby appointed as Additional Directors (Independent Category) of the Company with effect 
from 15.07.2026, to hold office up to the date of the ensuing AGM of the Company or the last date on 
which the AGM should have been held, whichever is earlier.”
"RESOLVED FURTHER THAT the declarations received from Shri Rajesh Davera and Shri Anand 
Shekhar Singh under Section 149(7) of the Companies Act, 2013 and Regulation 25(8) of the SEBI 
(LODR) Regulations, 2015, confirming that they meet the criteria of independence, be and are hereby 
taken on record."
The Company has received a notice in writing under Section 160 of the Companies Act, 2013 as 
amended from a member proposing the candidature of Shri Rajesh Davera as a director, to be 
appointed as such under the provisions of Section 149 of the Companies Act, 2013. The Company 
has received from him (i) consent in writing to act as director in Form DIR-2 pursuant to Rule 8 of the 
Companies (Appointment & Qualification of Directors) Rules, 2014, (ii) intimation in Form DIR-8 in 
terms of Companies (Appointment & Qualification of Directors) Rules, 2014, to the effect that he is not 
disqualified under sub section (2) of Section 164 of the Companies Act,2013. He has also given the 
Declaration of Independence. The resolution seeks the approval of members for the appointment of



	
21
Shri Rajesh Davera as an Independent Director of the Company from 15th July, 2026 and until further 
orders in terms of Ministry of Coal letter no. 21/21/2022- Estt (B) dated 15th July, 2026. He is not liable 
to retire by rotation.
a)	 Brief Resume- Shri Rajesh Davera (DIN- 11828075) is a distinguished tax consultant, financial 
management professional and corporate advisor with nearly four decades of extensive experience 
in taxation, finance, corporate advisory, internal audit and business administration. He has been 
appointed as Non-Official Independent Director on the Board of Central Mine Planning & Design 
Institute Limited (CMPDIL) with effect from 15.07.2026. He holds a Bachelor of Commerce 
(B.Com.) and Master of Commerce (M.Com.) from the University of Rajasthan. He has also 
completed Chartered Accountancy (Intermediate and Final Group-II) and earned an MBA in 
Financial Management from The Global Open University, combining strong financial expertise 
with sound managerial acumen. Since 1988, Shri Davera has been the Sole Proprietor of Rajesh 
Davera & Company, providing professional consultancy in Income Tax, VAT, GST, banking and 
financial advisory services. Over the years, he has advised numerous business establishments 
on taxation, financial planning, regulatory compliance and business management. Between 
2013 and 2018, he served as Chief Executive Officer (CEO) and Chief Financial Officer (CFO) of 
Chandraudai Automobiles Private Limited, Toyota Dealership for the Jodhpur and Bikaner regions, 
where he provided strategic leadership in corporate planning, financial management, operational 
excellence, business growth and governance. He also served as Internal Auditor of P.G. Foils 
Limited during 2014–2015, contributing to strengthening financial controls, audit systems and 
compliance frameworks.
b)	 Nature of expertise in specific functional areas- Finance, Taxation, Financial Management, 
Corporate Governance, Internal Audit, Administration, Strategic Planning and Business Advisory.
c)	 Disclosure of relationships between directors- He is not related to any other Director of 
CMPDIL.
d)	 He does not hold the directorship and the membership of committees of the board in any listed 
company and has also not resigned in the past three years.
e)	 No Director, Key managerial personnel or their relatives, except Shri Rajesh Davera to whom 
the resolution relates, is interested or concerned financially or otherwise in the resolution. No 
remuneration other than sitting fees is being paid to him for attending Board/ Committee Meetings. 
The Board of Directors considered that in view of the background and experience of Shri Rajesh 
Davera, it would be in the interest of the company to appoint him as an Independent Director of 
the Company. The Board recommends the special resolution set forth in Item No. B (8) for the 
approval of the members.
	
By Order of the Board of Directors
	
For Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Limited
	
Sd/-
	
(Abhishek Mundhra)
	
Company Secretary & Compliance Officer


22
CHAIRMAN’S STATEMENT
Shri Chaudhari Shivraj Singh
Chairman-cum-Managing Director
Dear Shareholders,
I have great pleasure in extending warm welcome to all of you to the 51st Annual General Meeting of 
CMPDIL and present to you the Annual Report of your Company for the Financial Year 2025-26. The 
Report of Directors and the Audited Accounts of your Company for the period ended 31st March, 2026 
along with the Report of the Statutory Auditors and the report & review of the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India have already been provided to all the shareholders of the Company.
Central Mine Planning and Design Institute Limited achieved a historic milestone during the year with 
the successful listing of the Company’s equity shares on the stock exchanges, namely National Stock 
Exchange of India Limited and BSE Limited. The listing marks a significant step in the Company’s 
growth journey and reflects the trust and confidence reposed by investors and stakeholders in 
CMPDIL’s strong fundamentals, technical excellence and long-standing contribution to the mining 
sector. As a listed entity, the Company remains committed to the highest standards of corporate 
governance, transparency, accountability and sustainable value creation for all stakeholders.
1.0	
The growth Profile:
CMPDIL was originally conceived and proposed in 1972 by a joint study group with the Polish Experts 
as a comprehensive planning set-up under one roof for entire Indian mining industry. Subsequently, 
CMPDIL was established on 1st November, 1975 as a subsidiary of the Holding company, Coal India 
Limited.
Your company has been rendering in-house consultancy services to CIL and its subsidiaries in the 
areas of coal exploration, mine planning & design, environmental engineering, coal beneficiation & 
utilization, allied engineering services, information and communication technology, human resource 
development, remote sensing, field services, etc. Similar services are also being provided to ‘Other 
than CIL’ clients. Exploration, Planning and related services are also being provided to some extent 
to metal mining sectors. Additionally, CMPDIL also renders services to Ministry of Coal and MoP&NG 
pertaining to Non-CIL blocks, coal based non-conventional energy resources i.e. Coalbed Methane, 
Underground Coal Gasification and other non-conventional energy resources like Shale Gas, etc.



	
23
Over the years after formation of CMPDIL, the level of expertise of its planners and engineers was 
raised through bilateral agreements with foreign institutions of advanced coal mining countries 
like Giproshakht of erstwhile USSR, KOPEX of Poland and British Mining Consultants of the UK 
for carrying out joint planning exercises for large opencast and underground projects. In addition to 
enhancing the level of expertise of CMPDIL personnel, significant build-up of infrastructural facilities 
was undertaken by establishing computer and laboratory facilities. All these measures ensured the 
company a unique position in the mineral and mining sector as a total solution provider under one roof. 
Moreover, the company has been committed in overall upgradation of its services and facilities to a 
level par excellence so as to keep pace with the changing scenario of business environment. This very 
assertion is well substantiated by the fact that the company has been actively involved in enhancing 
the pace of exploration through deploying 2D/3D seismic survey technologies, high productive drill 
machines as well as for the adoption of ‘Digital Technology’ and the use of latest software related to 
exploration and mining industry apart from addition of equipment particularly related to environmental 
facilities, mine surveys, characterization of coal as well as introduction of ISO standards.
Exploration, one of the core activities of CMPDIL, which enables projectisation of coal blocks to 
meet future production requirement, was hovering around 2 lakh meters per annum (2.02 lakh 
meters in 2004–05 to 2.09 lakh meters in 2007–08). Most of the drilling activities were carried out 
through departmental resources. In the beginning of XI Plan, it was conceived that CMPDIL would 
need substantial expansion in its role, particularly in the field of exploration, in view of the need for 
faster proving of resources. Accordingly, apart from addition in the departmental drilling capacity, 
enhancement by way of using the drilling capacities of other agencies including MECL was emphasized 
and a part of the drilling activities was also outsourced to private agencies. Parallely, expansion in the 
coal core testing capability of CMPDIL was also carried out. Moreover, capacities of other laboratories 
like Environment, CBM, Mining Technology, etc., were enhanced through upgradation with indigenous 
and imported equipment.
In June 2023, the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs approved the continuation of Central 
Sector Schemes for exploration in coal and lignite during the 15th Finance Commission cycle, i.e., up 
to 2025–26. Consequent upon this approval, CMPDIL achieved approximately 11.50 lakh metres of 
drilling in 2025–26, registering a growth of about 14% over the previous year. The quantum of drilling 
is expected to increase further in the coming years, supported by sustained policy thrust and capacity 
augmentation initiatives.
As part of the strategic shift towards diversification into non-coal sector, and with support from NMEDT 
funding, CMPDIL has successfully completed three bauxite exploration projects in Jharkhand. In 
addition, two projects on base metal exploration (copper, lead, and zinc) has been completed. One 
more exploration projects for magnetite is currently under progress. Further, 2 blocks for exploration 
of Graphite have also been granted by DGO, Orissa for implementation through NMEDT funding. 
CMPDIL has actively participated in the first tranche of auction for exploration license by Govt. of 
India and successfully acquired one REE exploration license block – Nawatala Devigarh in the state 
of Rajasthan. CMPDI also acted as a transactional advisor for CIL in the acquisition of the Ontillu 
Chandragiri REE block in Andhra Pradesh in the 1st tranche of auction.
Diversification of its services and expansion of client base is a constant focus area of CMPDIL.


24
Proactive efforts are being made to increase visibility of CMPDIL through one to one meetigs with 
target prospective clients, attending relevant seminars/exhibitions, increasing participation in overseas 
exhibitions and leveraging outreach of social media. Collaboration with State Governments and State 
PSUs have also contributed immensely in increasing visibility of CMPDIL nationwide as a dependable 
organization providing right solutions. 
These efforts are being backed up by timely, efficient and dependable services being rendered to 
our clients. Constant reskilling and upskilling of our manpower, acquisition of latest equipment and 
software and motivating team to work with higher efficiency and responsibility are major thrust areas 
to sustain these efforts.   
Along with the diversification, the distinctiveness of the company would be kept preserved for the 
interest of the coal sector as a whole in foreseeable future.
2.0	
Financial Performance:
During the financial year 2025-26, your company has achieved Net turnover of Rs.2316.53 crore, with 
a profit before tax of Rs. 823.64 crore, other comprehensive income (gross) of Rs. 4.17 crore. The net 
worth excluding capital reserve of your company has risen to Rs. 2283.24 (including OCI of Rs. 35.30 
crore) as on 31.03.2026. During the financial year, the earning per share has reduced to Rs. 8.59 
(computed on 71,40,00,000 shares) from Rs. 9.34 (computed on 71,40,00,000 shares) a year back.
3.0	
Drilling and Seismic Survey Performance:
CMPDIL has achieved about 11.50 lakh meter of drilling against the target of 11.00 lakh meter which 
includes drilling of about 4.73 lakh meter through departmental drills. CMPDIL also carried out about 
455.23 line km of 2D/3D seismic surveys in 2025-26, resulting in an impressive 4% year-on-year 
growth, which included about 345.59 line km of seismic surveys using departmental resources, 
reflecting a 15% increase compared to the previous year. 
In FY 2025-26, a total of 31 Geological Reports (GR) have been prepared. About 11.8 billion tonnes of 
coal resources have been estimated in the Measured (Proved) Category through Detailed Exploration 
covering an area of about 306 sq km through 24 Geological Reports. In addition to this, about 3.7 billion 
tonnes of new coal resources (in Indicated and Inferred categories) are estimated through Regional 
(Promotional) Exploration covering an area of about 109 sq km through 7 Geological Reports.
Adding on to it, a total of 317 reports including 136 Ground Water Modeling (GWM) reports and 136 
Comprehensive Hydrogeological Reports, were prepared during the year. Number of Ground Water 
Modelling (GWM) reports prepared increased significantly from 90 reports in the previous year to 136 
reports in 2025–26. This substantial rise in in-house report preparation has effectively reduced the 
reliance on outsourcing for GWM report preparation.
4.0	
Project Reports:
During the year under review, a total of 30 Project Reports (PRs) have been prepared which includes 
19 PRs for Opencast Projects and 11 PRs for Underground Projects. One opencast PR has been 
prepared for Rabodih OCP (2.5 Mty), a Non-CIL mine, of M/s Twenty First Century Mining Pvt. Ltd.



	
25
During the year 2025-26, two major Opencast Projects namely Recast PR of Magadh OC (51 Mty), 
CCL and Expansion PR of Lakhanpur Belpahar Lilari OCP (50 Mty), MCL have been planned. Other 
mega projects planned for CIL include Jampali Expansion OC (20 Mty), SECL; Balbhadra North-West 
Expansion OC (20 Mty), MCL; Block F Reorganised OC (13 Mty), BCCL; Ongaon Potia OC (10 Mty), 
SECL and Recast PR of Durgapur OC (10 Mty), SECL.
Two large Underground Projects namely Inguri UG (4 Mty), NCL and Labji Pusla sector-1 UG, (3 Mty), 
SECL have also been planned during the year 2025-26.
5.0	
Upgradation of Laboratories:
Capacities of all the laboratories in CMPDIL have been upgraded. The Geo-chemical laboratory 
is equipped with manual/semi-automatic sample preparation units, Proximate Analyzers, Ultimate 
Analyzers, Bomb Calorimeters, Ash fusion temperature range Analyzer, HGI Apparatus, etc. The lab 
is also equipped with X-Ray Fluorescence system (XRF) facility which enables for performing Ash 
Analysis and other metal oxides. Direct Mercury Analyzer for determining Mercury (Hg) content in 
liquid and solid samples is available. Instruments such as Swelling Index, LTGK, Plastometer are 
also available for determining coking properties of coal. Recently, the laboratory has been equipped 
with X-Ray Diffractometer (XRD) system capable to analyse the presence of minerals in unknown 
samples, free silica in mine dust samples.
Non-coal samples (Base metals) preparation unit comprising vibratory cup mills and automatic Jaw 
crushers for sample preparation of desired sample size requirements has also been established 
recently in the lab. In the direction of establishment of Mineral Identification facility for non-coal, 
CMPDIL is in the process of procurement of Rock cutting and polishing unit along with Reflected Light 
Polarizing Research microscope. Also, for qualitative and quantitative identification of Rare Earth 
Elements (REE) and trace metals, a fully operational ICP-MS (Inductively Coupled Plasma–Mass 
Spectrometry) laboratory facility is under process of being established. 
The petrography lab is equipped with Advance Petrological Microscopes for carrying Petrographic 
studies in which the maceral content (Coal type) and reflectance percentage (Rank/Maturity) of coal 
samples are determined.  Petrographic studies are imperative for ascertaining the suitability of given 
coal as blends in coke making.
One Chemical Analysis lab has been set-up at CMPDIL, RI-VII, Bhubaneshwar to further enhance the 
coal core processing capacity.
Coal Characterisation Laboratory is accredited with NABL certification in accordance with the standard 
ISO/IEC 17025:2017 for its facilities in the field of “TESTING” in 12 different scopes. The Petrographers in 
Petrography Lab have been certified by International Committee of Coal and Organic Petrology (ICCP).
Coal & Mineral Preparation (CMP) Laboratory is accredited with NABL certification in accordance with 
the standard ISO/IEC 17025:2017 “General requirements for the Competence of Testing & Calibration 
Laboratories” for its facilities in the field of “TESTING” in 4 different scopes. Accreditation by such 
recognized body is considered as an essential step for facilitating mutual acceptance of test results.


26
NABL continued accreditation to Non-Destructive Testing (NDT) laboratory of CMPDIL HQ, based on 
ISO/IEC 17025:2017 for its facilities/scope, in the field of Non- Destructive Testing. NDT Cells have 
been established at different Regional Institutes of CMPDIL with proper equipment and resources.
The Environmental Laboratory at CMPDIL (HQ), Ranchi was re-accredited by the National Accreditation 
Board for Testing & Calibration Laboratories (NABL) in accordance with the ISO/IEC 17025:2017 
standards for 170 parameters. This accreditation remains in effect until 24th March, 2029. The 
laboratory is recognized by JSPCB and it is valid till 24th March, 2029. The lab also holds accreditation 
as per Occupational Health and Safety Management System (OHSMS) IS/ISO 45001:2018. Similarly, 
the Environment Laboratories of RI-I, Asansol; RI-II, Dhanbad; RI-IV, Nagpur; RI-V, Bilaspur; and 
RI-VII, Bhubaneswar also have NABL accreditation under the ISO/IEC 17025:2017 standards. 
The assessment of Environment Laboratory at RI-VI, Singrauli has been done by NABL and NABL 
accreditation under the ISO/IEC 17025:2017 standards is expected to be issued shortly.
CMPDIL has a state-of-the-art Laboratory to provide services for CBM and Shale Gas specific 
analyses. These services include Gas Desorption Tests, Adsorption Isotherm Tests, Gas Composition 
Analysis, Rock Eval Pyrolysis, Total Organic Carbon (TOC), Helium Porosity & Permeability Tests, 
Mine Air Sample Analysis, etc.
Mining Technology (MT) Lab has been re-accredited with NABL Certification in accordance with the 
standard ISO/IEC 17025:2017 in the field of testing facilities which is valid until 4th May 2030. The 
Physico-Mechanical properties (PMP) testing facilities available in the Mining Laboratory include 
Unconfined compressive strength, Tensile strength, Shear strength, Elastic constants (Young’s 
modulus, Poisson’s ratio), Bulk density, Triaxial compressive strength (Cohesion & Angle of internal 
friction), Protodyakonov strength index (PSI), Point load index, Slake durability index(SDI), Rock 
Quality Designation (RQD), etc. The lab provides the facilities of determination of Rock Mass Rating 
(RMR), Support Design, Cavability Index and Strata Control & Monitoring Plan (SCAMP) study. It also 
has the facilities of Core drilling Machine for preparation of core Samples for PMP testing of Rock/
Coal of Lumps received from Underground and opencast Mines. This test result is used for Scientific 
study of Underground Pillar stability and slope stability of Opencast Mine.
6.0	
Manpower Induction:
During 2025-26, 79 nos. of executives have been posted in CMPDIL through transfer & recruitment 
and 19 nos. of non-executives have been posted in CMPDIL through transfer from other subsidiaries 
& appointment through compassionate ground as per provision of National Coal Wage Agreement 
(NCWA). 49 nos. of executives and 12 nos. of non-executives have been transferred from CMPDIL 
to other subsidiaries of CIL during the year. Moreover, efforts for transfer of qualified manpower 
from other subsidiaries to cater to the present and future workload of mine planning in CMPDIL is 
being undertaken. 111 nos. of Non-Executive employees have been upgraded to higher post through 
Departmental Selection in the year 2025-26.
7.0	
Geomatics Services:
CMPDIL has been carrying out Satellite Data based Land Reclamation Monitoring of CIL mines on a 
regular basis based on high resolution satellite data since 2008. In FY 2025-26, Land Reclamation 
Monitoring of total 110 projects, comprising of 75 Opencast Projects producing more than 5 million



	
27
cubic meter (Mcm) (Coal + OB) category which are monitored on annual basis and 35 mines/ Clusters 
producing less than 5 Mcm (Coal + OB) category which are monitored at an interval of three years 
in phase-wise manner under different subsidiaries of CIL, were successfully completed. Vegetation 
cover mapping of six coalfields, Core & Buffer zone mapping of 25 projects for EIA/ EMP preparation 
were also carried out during the year. GIS related job for determination of Carrying Capacity of NCL 
was also completed in the year. Thermal Infrared Satellite Data based mapping of thermal anomalies 
in fire affected Chirimiri OC was completed during the year.
OBR Measurement of all OC mines, both outsourced and departmental, producing more than 1 MTY 
and the annual measurement of OC mines producing less than 1 MTY (only hired patches) have been 
completed and reports have also been submitted. 
CMPDIL is coordinating and facilitating development of MoC page on PM Gati Shakti - National Master 
Plan with Bhaskaracharya National Institute of Space Application & Geo Informatics, Gandhinagar 
(BISAG-N) for Ministry of Coal.
CMPDIL is ensuring smooth functioning and keeping the site of Coal Mine Surveillance and 
Management System along with the associated Mobile App, Khanan Prahari, updated in association with 
Bhaskaracharya National Institute of Space Application & Geo Informatics(BISAG-N), Gandhinagar.
CMPDIL has operationalized Drone/ UAV based Surveys for various applications. Some major 
projects executed during the year include Volume Computation of Coal heaps in 8 mines of MCL, 
Sand Replenishment Studies of Sand Leases in the State of Rajasthan using Drone/UAV based 
Photogrammetry. DGPS Survey for Coal Blocks under auction was successfully completed.
8.0	
Assistance for setting up of coal washeries:
CMPDIL offers technical services for Greenfield coal washeries, right from preparation of Conceptual 
Reports to award of works for new washeries and modification/modernization of existing washeries. 
These services encompass exhaustive laboratory studies, preparation of Detailed Project Report 
(DPR) and Pre-Feasibility Report (PFR)/ Conceptual Report (CR), bid process management, contract 
document preparation, assistance in award of works followed by scrutiny of drawings during project 
execution and assistance in trial run, PGT, etc. 
During the year, several key reports and studies were completed including the Pioneering Initiative for 
India’s First Dry Deshaling Plant in CIL by CMPDIL at Chitra mine of ECL and providing consultancy 
services for setting up of Talabira Coal Washery (5.0 Mty Washed coal) at Talabira II & III OCP for 
NLCIL. Feasibility reports for setting up of deshaling plant/washery for Balaram-Hingula mine and 
Kulda-Garjanbahal mine in MCL, Deshaling plant at Bina-Kakri OCP in NCL were prepared.
CIL’s First Model EPC Bid Document for Washeries was prepared by CMPDIL which will help in 
standardization and streamlining the process for EPC-based washeries across CIL subsidiaries.
9.0	
Environmental Services:
During 2025-26, 67 nos. of reports i.e. 21 nos. of Draft EIA/EMPs/Addendum EIA/EMP 
(Environmental Impact Assessment/Environment Management Plans) and 46 nos. Form-I/Form-IV/


28
Form-VI were prepared and environmental monitoring of 303 projects/clusters/establishments of 
CIL was carried out through eight environmental laboratories located at Asansol, Dhanbad, Nagpur, 
Bilaspur, Bhubaneswar, Hasdeo, Jayant and Ranchi. Some specialized works like carrying capacity 
studies, ecological monitoring of mine, biodiversity assessment studies of reclamation sites, Sand 
Replenishment Studies, design of STP and ETP were also undertaken by CMPDIL.
“Comprehensive Study Report on Mine Water Utilisation for active and abandoned mine voids of CIL” 
and “Model DPRs for rejuvenation of water bodies for 4 subsidiaries of CIL i.e., CCL, WCL, SECL 
and MCL” were prepared and submitted under SDC for MoC. CMPDIL is carrying out the work of 
GHG Estimation from Abandoned Wells and Coal Mines in collaboration with IIT(ISM), Dhanbad for 
submission of BTR-2 and BTR-3 reports to MoEF&CC for onward submission to UNFCC. This is the 
first time that MoEF&CC has entrusted this work to CMPDIL.
Special studies like Scientific Soil Moisture Conservation (SMC) Plan, Top Soil Management & Soil 
Erosion Plan; Green House Gas (GHG) Emission Study report, Carbon Sequestration Study report, 
Carrying Capacity Study report of Riverine Ecosystem and Pollution Reduction Study reports were 
prepared for different mines of CIL subsidiary companies.
Furthermore, CMPDIL is continuing its accreditation as Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) 
consulting organization by Quality Council of India (QCI), New Delhi for mining of minerals including 
opencast/underground Mining, Mineral Beneficiation, CBM and Coal Washery sectors to render its 
services to CIL and other organization spread across India for EIA studies. CMPDIL is the largest 
Accredited Consultant Organization (ACO) in India for preparation of EIA & EMP and having more 
than 100 nos. of approved experts to its credit.
10.0	 Initiative for Development of Coal based Alternative Energy Resources :
CMPDIL is engaged in development of coal based unconventional resources like Coal Bed Methane 
(CBM) and Coal Gasification for CIL and its subsidiaries. Three CBM blocks are presently under 
consideration in CIL Leasehold areas viz. 1) Jharia CBM Block-I (Jharia Coalfield), 2) Raniganj CBM 
Block (Raniganj Coalfield), 3.) Jharia CBM Block-II (Jharia Coalfield). 
Jharia CBM Block-I (BCCL leasehold area) has been awarded to M/s Prabha Energy Limited (PEL) for 
extraction of CBM on revenue sharing basis. The Block is currently under Exploration Phase. Drilling 
of 5 Exploratory Coreholes and 04 Test Wells have been completed.  Raniganj and Jharia CBM Block-
II have been proposed to be developed after selection of CBM developer through tendering.
An R&D pilot project for establishing Underground Coal Gasification (UCG) Technology in Indian Geo-
Mining Conditions is being implemented by CMPDIL, ECL and Ergo Exergy Technology Inc. (EETI), 
Canada jointly. CMPDIL and ECL are the Principal Implementing Agencies and EETI, Canada is Sub-
implementing agency.
The project comprises of two Phases. Phase-I involving Site Selection, Characterization & Pre-
Feasibility Study has been successfully completed on 31st May, 2025. Phase-II of the Project 
comprising of Pilot Plant Design, Construction, Commissioning, Operations, Shutdown and Post-
Shutdown Monitoring commenced on 20th June, 2025 which is under implementation.



	
29
11.0	 S&T projects and R&D projects:
CMPDIL is the Nodal Agency to coordinate research activities funded under the S&T Grant of the 
Ministry of Coal and R&D Board of CIL. Besides coordination of different R&D works being carried 
out by various academic and research institutes/ organizations, CMPDIL, with its well-established 
laboratories, is also undertaking research in key areas of coal/lignite mining industries like coal 
exploration; development of coal-based non-conventional energy resources like Coal Bed Methane 
(CBM), Coal Mine Methane (CMM), Coal gasification, Shale gas assessment; coal beneficiation & 
utilization; improvement of production, productivity, and safety in mines; protection of mine environment 
and ecology; alternative use of coal and clean coal technology; innovation and indigenization, etc.
During 2025-26, 13 nos. of research projects have been completed. These completed research 
projects pertain to “Assessing the Abiotic and Biotic Factors in Pit Lakes for Sustainable Management 
of Water and Environment”, “Indigenous Development of NIR spectroscope for instant prediction of 
Coal Quality Parameters”, “Development of Synthetic Lightweight Aggregates as Backfilling Material 
using Hydraulic Stowing Method”, “Use of Microseismicity as a tool for underground mines hazard 
monitoring with the motive to enhance safety and production”, “Recycling Coal Mine Overburden 
to reuse as a value added building material to promote a circular economy”, “ Establishment of 
Geo-thermal energy (20KW) power generation Pilot Project at Manuguru area of SCCL Command 
area based on closed loop Binary Organic Rankine Cycle Process technology”, “Real-time energy 
efficient cyber-physical intelligent system for mine slope health monitoring”, “Indigenous Development 
of Monolithic Perovskite Module Manufacturing by Printing”, “A Pilot Project on Underground 
Coal Gasification (UCG) to establish the technology in Indian geo-mining conditions-(Phase-I)”, 
“Development of guidelines for delineation of water-stressed areas and designing of environmental 
friendly water storage structure for meeting the water needs in mining areas”, ”Upgradation of high ash 
Indian coal through physical and chemical beneficiation”, “Development of guideline for prevention 
& mitigation of explosion hazard by risk assessment and determination of explosibility of Indian coal 
incorporating risk based mine emergency evacuation and re-entry protocol” and  Assessment of safe 
parting thickness and optimal goaf edge support requirement for extraction of pillars under soft cover.
At present, there are 40 ongoing research projects being executed in association with reputed 
organizations like IITs; NITs; C-DAC, CIMFR, CSIR, NML Jamshedpur, University of Wollongong, 
Australia, etc.
A National Centre for Coal and Energy Research (NaCCER) has been established at CMPDIL which 
focuses on utilizing the existing infrastructure and experienced manpower at CMPDIL Ranchi. This 
centre is dedicated to fostering collaboration between national and international experts, ensuring 
the integration of cutting-edge technologies and knowledge sharing in mining, energy efficiency, and 
clean coal solutions. The centre is also committed to securing intellectual property for new discoveries 
and facilitating collaborations with industry and foreign stakeholders to develop advanced, disruptive 
technologies.
In 2025-26, CMPDIL successfully organized “Hackathon on R&D” to harness a vital natural resource 
to meet the energy and chemical needs of the nation, fostering economic independence and 
environmental sustainability. CMPDIL also organised “Hackathon on Carbon Capture Technology” to 
encourage start-ups and research organizations in the field of Carbon Capture Technology.


30
12.0	 Corporate Social Responsibility and Sustainability:
CMPDIL is constantly striving for the welfare and upliftment of its surrounding communities and general 
public life under its Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) policy along with its business objectives. 
In the last few years, CMPDIL has taken various initiatives in the areas of health, education, skill 
development, environment and sanitation, infrastructure, etc. for development and upliftment of the 
communities around its Headquarters, Regional Institutes and Drilling Camps under CSR.  CMPDIL 
has ensured its commitment by spending more than the target.
Major activities carried out under CSR during the year 2025-26 include Developing healthcare skills 
through General Nursing & Midwifery (GNM) to girls from tribal blocks of Jharkhand; Extending support 
to socio-economic underprivileged at the Ranchi Cancer Hospital and Research Centre (RCHRC), 
Ranchi for detection of cancer; Promoting healthy menstrual hygiene practices through trainings 
and access to sanitary napkins with easy disposal to students of 15 Govt. schools, Asansol, West 
Bengal and 85 schools of Ramgarh, Jharkhand; Badhte Kadam: Elimination of disability from Clubfoot 
through Ponseti method to children born with clubfoot at Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh and West 
Bengal; Installation of water cooler within inbuilt R.O. water system to 48 Govt. Schools of Ranchi; 
provisioning of items under Panchh Tatva such as drinking water facility, solar lights, menstrual health 
awareness and improvement of nutrition in Govt. Schools of Ranchi and Nagpur; Providing essential 
medical equipment/instruments to CIMS, Bilaspur; provisioning of cochlear implants to 15 children 
below seven years through AIIMS, Nagpur; job oriented skill development to under-privileged youths 
in phlebotomy, junior technician and machine operator, Ranchi; facility of Atal tinkering labs in Govt. 
Schools of Ranchi and ambulance for animal welfare, Ranchi.
13.0	 Consultancy Services in Management System standards:
CMPDIL is facilitating for implementation of Management System standards in all subsidiaries of Coal 
India Limited and providing consultancy services for application of different Management System 
standards, like ISO 9001, ISO 14001, ISO 45001, ISO 50001, ISO/IEC 27001, ISO 37001, etc. We 
provide guidance and support in establishment & documentation of the system, awareness towards 
the documented systems, trainings, internal auditors training, auditing supports, implementation, 
certification support as well as post certification support for effective implementation of these 
management system standards.
CMPDIL, with all its Regional Institutes, has been licensed by Bureau of Indian Standards for ISO 
9001:2015 – Quality Management System (QMS) after verifying the compliance of the requirements 
of ISO 9001:2015 standard. The present IMS Manual of CMPDIL addresses the requirements of ISO 
9001- Quality Management System, and ISO/IEC 27001- Information Management System. CMPDIL 
HQ, Ranchi has also implemented and certified for ISO 37001:2016 – Anti Bribery Management System.
CIL HQ, Kolkata has got certification against ISO 9001:2015, ISO 14001:2015 and ISO 50001:2018 
from Bureau of Indian Standards under the guidance and support of CMPDIL. 
As on 31st March 2026, three Subsidiaries of CIL i.e. ECL, NCL, and MCL are certified for Integrated 
Management System (ISO 9001:2015, ISO 14001:2015 and ISO 45001:2018). NCL is also certified 
for ISO/IEC 27001- Information security management system under the consultancy guidance of 
CMPDIL.



	
31
14.0	 Consultancy-other than CIL
CMPDIL has continued its effort towards diversification of its services and enhancement in client 
base outside CIL, which includes Public Sectors, Government (Central and State) as well as Private 
Agencies. 
The company secured 142 consultancy jobs from outside CIL clients worth ₹131.02 crores.
CMPDIL has significantly expanded its client base outside of CIL, adding more than 40 new clients in 
FY 2025-26. The major outside clients of CMPDIL in FY 2025-26 include NTPC Mining Limited (NML), 
WBPDCL (West Bengal Power Development Corporation Limited), THDC India Limited, TPGCL 
(TSGENCO), Government of Bihar, Rungta Sons Private Limited, Adani Enterprises Ltd, Jindal Steel 
and Power Limited (JSPL), Jindal Power Limited (JPL), OMIL (Orissa Metallurgical Industries Limited), 
RMIP (Rashmi Metallurgical Industry Private Limited), MMPL, Lloyds Metal & Energy Limited, CESC 
Ltd., and various Commercial Coal Block Owners.
15.0	 Information and Communication Technology services
CMPDIL has developed and implemented Exploration module of Single Window Clearance System 
portal of MoC. This major digital advancement marks a transformative step in streamlining the online 
approval process for Exploration Proposals and Geological Reports. The portal was inaugurated on 
4th July, 2025 by Hon’ble Minister of Coal and Mines, Govt. of India.
16.0	 First Mile Connectivity (FMC) Projects:
In first phase, 33 First Mile Connectivity (FMC) projects with a capacity of 382.5 MTY were taken up 
by CIL, in which CMPDIL played a key role and submitted NIT for all the projects in record time. 24 
projects have already been commissioned and remaining projects are at various stages of construction.
8 FMC projects with a capacity of 57 MTY have been identified in FMC-II, out of which 7 projects are 
under construction at various stages, final NIT has been submitted for remaining 1 project. 
17 FMC projects with a capacity of 324 MTY have been identified in FMC-III, out of which CMPDIL 
is playing a key role for preparation of NIT of 9 projects. Out of these 9 projects, 1 project has 
already been commissioned, 4 projects are under construction, final NIT for other 3 projects has been 
submitted and NIT of 1 project is under preparation.
In fourth phase of FMC, 14 projects with a capacity of 70 MTY have been identified, out of which 
CMPDIL has to prepare NIT for 9 projects. Out these 9 projects, 1 project is under construction, NIT 
for 1 project has been submitted and for others 7 projects NIT will be prepared as per CIL timeline.
CMPDIL has conducted third party quality Audit for 22 nos. under construction FMC projects as per 
directive of MOC and CIL and submitted its report to respective CIL subsidiaries.
First Mile Connectivity (FMC) Projects implemented by Coal India Limited provide substantial 
environmental benefits by introducing mechanized coal handling and eco-friendly evacuation systems 
such as conveyors, silos, rapid loading systems, and rail transportation, thereby significantly reducing 
dependence on road-based coal transport. These projects help minimize fugitive dust emissions,


32
vehicular pollution, diesel consumption, noise pollution, traffic congestion, and coal spillage, leading 
to improved air quality and cleaner surroundings in mining areas and nearby communities. FMC 
systems also reduce water requirement for dust suppression, lower the overall carbon footprint of coal 
transportation, and promote sustainable and green mining practices while ensuring better compliance 
with environmental norms and pollution control standards.
17.0	 Auction of Coal Block for Commercial Mining
CMPDIL has played an important role in the auction of Coal Blocks for Commercial Mining conducted 
by Ministry of Coal. In identification of Coal Blocks to be offered for auction, CMPDIL has contributed 
significantly in study of surface constraints, geo-technical factors, collecting opinion of prospective 
bidders etc. Mine Dossiers and Mine Summaries were submitted by CMPDIL for the coal blocks 
selected by MoC for different tranches of auction. Additionally, important input data for tendering 
purpose were also made available to MoC by CMPDIL for all these coal blocks. 133 coal blocks have 
been successfully auctioned till 13th tranche of auction by Ministry of Coal.
18.0	 5G Application in Coal Mines
CMPDIL, in collaboration with Telecommunications Consultants India Limited (TCIL), New Delhi, has 
established a dedicated “5G Centre of Excellence (CoE) – Use Case Test Lab” featuring a lab-scale 5G 
Captive Non-Public Network (CNPN). This initiative is aimed at accelerating digital transformation and 
strengthening the technological landscape of the coal sector. The 5G Use Case Test Lab serves as a 
robust platform for the development, testing, and customization of advanced 5G-enabled applications 
tailored to the specific operational requirements of the coal industry.
To validate and operationalize 5G technology in opencast mining environments, CMPDIL in 
collaboration with CDAC, Thiruvananthapuram has undertaken an R&D project titled “5G Captive Non-
Public Network (CNPN) for Integrated Voice, Video & Data Communication in Opencast Coal Mines” 
at Amlohri Opencast Mine of Northern Coalfields Limited (NCL), Singrauli. For underground mining 
applications, CMPDIL, in association with ITI Limited, Lucknow, is also executing an R&D project 
titled “Automation, Control & Wireless Communication in Underground Mines on 4G LTE/5G Ready 
Communication Network” at Jhanjhra Mine of Eastern Coalfields Limited (ECL). This project focuses 
on enhancing safety, automation, and communication infrastructure in underground mining operations.
Building upon these initiatives, CMPDIL has also undertaken consultancy assignments for preparation 
of Detailed Project Reports for implementation of 5G technology with CNPN and associated use 
cases in BCCL and MCL.
19.0	 Development of Coal e-Auction Platform
Earlier, Coal e-Auction was being done only by outside agencies viz. MSTC and Mjunction. 
Subsequently, as per directives of CIL, CMPDIL has developed the Coal e-Auction platform for auction 
of Coal as per the Single Window Mode Agnostic (SWMA) Scheme 2022. The development of Portal 
and its modifications has been done by NIC, MeitY, GoI, who is our technology partner for this project. 
The portal was formally inaugurated on 03.10.2023.



	
33
More than 8000 bidders have registered themselves in the coal e-auction portal. Till March 2026, 
CMPDIL has successfully conducted 275 e-auctions for all subsidiaries of CIL for more than 166 
million tonnes of coal. CMPDIL has re-developed its auction portal as per modified SWMA Coal 
e-Auction Scheme. CMPDIL is also developing portal for conducing auction of coal under modified 
SHAKTI Policy 2025 (Short Term) by engaging NIC as its technology partner.
20.0	 Recognition and Awards:
Government of India recognized the contribution and relevance of CMPDIL and conferred it with the 
status of a Mini Ratna (Category-I) in 2019 in accordance with the provisions of the Department of 
Public Enterprise's (DPE's) guidelines in their O/M No. 11/36/97-Fin dated 09-10-1993. The DPE’s 
directions provide for grant of enhanced autonomy and delegation of powers to the profit-making 
public-sector enterprises (PSEs) as a policy objective for making the public sector more efficient and 
competitive. Impressive performance of CMPDIL got reflected in getting Excellent MoU (between CIL 
& CMPDIL) rating consistently since 2007-08 (barring 2010-11, 2018-19 and 2020-21 when it was 
rated as ‘Very Good’). MoU for 2024-25 with ‘Excellent’ rating has also been approved by CIL.
21.0	 Corporate Governance:
The provisions of Corporate Governance, as stipulated in Companies Act, 2013 and the guidelines 
on Corporate Governance for Central Public Sector Enterprises issued by Department of Public 
Enterprises, Govt. of India and Regulation 34(3) read with Schedule V of the SEBI (Listing Obligations 
and Disclosure Requirements) Regulations, 2015, a separate section on corporate governance forms 
part of this Director's Report a certificate from the Secretarial Auditor confirming compliance with the 
applicable corporate governance requirement is annexed to this Director's Report.
22.0	 Listing of CMPDIL:
The Financial Year 2025–26 marked a historic milestone in the journey of Central Mine Planning 
and Design Institute Limited with the successful listing of the Company’s equity shares on the stock 
exchanges. As part of the listing process, the Draft Red Herring Prospectus (DRHP) was filed with 
Securities and Exchange Board of India and the stock exchanges on May 26, 2025 followed by filing 
of the Red Herring Prospectus (RHP) on March 12, 2026. Subsequently, the Prospectus was filed on 
March 25,2026 upon completion of the Issue process. The equity shares of the Company were listed 
and admitted to trading on National Stock Exchange of India Limited and BSE Limited on 30th March, 
2026. The listing of CMPDIL marks the beginning of a new chapter in the Company’s growth journey 
and reinforces our commitment towards the highest standards of corporate governance, transparency, 
operational excellence and long-term stakeholder value creation.
23.0	 Acknowledgement
All these achievements could be possible because of the concerted efforts of employees of your 
company, wholehearted support from members of Trade Union (JCC) and Officers’ Association as 
well as the help extended by CIL and Ministry of Coal. I believe that the kind of employee involvement, 
commitment and level of expertise now available in the company would be a source of great comfort


34
for the future commitments. I am confident that we shall continue to move forward for achieving 
greater heights in future and meet the challenges as well as expectations of the shareholders with our 
dedicated commitment and performance at all levels as in the past.
I express my sincere thanks to all the shareholders, Ministry of Coal, other Ministries and Departments, 
State Governments, all employees, trade unions, customers and vendors for their whole-hearted 
support and relentless co-operation.
	
	
Sd/-
Place	 :	 Ranchi	
(Chaudhari Shivraj Singh)
Date	 :	 10.07.2026	
Chairman-cum-Managing Director



	
35
CMPDI LTD
PERFORMANCE AT A GLANCE
(Rs in crores)
Financial Year
2025-26 
(Audited)
2024-25 
(Audited)
2023-24 
(Audited)
PARTICULARS
Sale of Services(Net Sales)
2316.53
2102.76
1732.69
Other Income
80.92
74.77
37.49
Total Income
2397.45
2177.53
1770.18
Total expenses
1573.81
1295.39
1037.34
PBT
823.64
882.14
732.84
PAT
613.18
666.91
503.23
Net Block
242.91
246.95
246.75
Current Assets
2935.8
2400.6
1889.96
Current Liabilities
877.13
553.48
477.5
Working Capital
2058.67
1847.12
1412.46
Capital Employed *
2285.91
2048.97
1595.48
Equity Capital
142.8
142.8
142.8
Reserve & Surplus
2140.44
1899.05
1448.81
Net Worth**
2283.24
2041.85
1591.61
Return on Capital Employed
32.85
40.36
43.93
EPS in Rupees***
8.59
9.34
7.05
* Capital employed= Tangible Net Worth + Total Debt + Deferred Tax Liability
** Net Worth= Equity Share Capital +Reserves & Surplus excluding Capital reserve
*** Earning Per share has been restated based on Total no. of Equity Shares Outstanding 71,40,00,000 nos.


36
FINANCIAL OVERVIEW OF CMPDIL
Expense Breakup (2025-26)
Cost of Material 2.36%
Ohters
47.64%
Depreciation- 2.58%
Employee Benefit
47.42%
Sales Breakup FY (2025-26)
Geomatics
15.55%
Exploration
46.16%
Planning & Design
21.18%
Environment- 17.11%
2025-26 (Audited)
2316.53
2102.76
1732.69
2024-25 (Audited)
2023-24 (Audited)
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
Sale of Service (Net Sales) Rs. in Crores



	
37
2025-26 (Audited)
8.59
9.34
7.05
2024-25 (Audited)
2023-24 (Audited)
10
8
6
4
2
0
EPS in Rs.
FINANCIAL OVERVIEW OF CMPDIL
2025-26 (Audited)
2283.24
2041.85
1591.61
2024-25 (Audited)
2023-24 (Audited)
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
Net Worth in Crores
2025-26 (Audited)
823.64
882.14
732.84
2024-25 (Audited)
2023-24 (Audited)
1000
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
PBT in Rs. Crores


38
To
The Shareholders 
On behalf of the Board of Directors, I have great 
pleasure in presenting the 51st Annual Report 
on the working of your Company along with the 
Accounts for the year ended 31st March, 2026 and 
Reports of Statutory Auditors and the Comptroller 
and Auditor General of India thereon.
PART: A
1.0	
CORPORATE OVERVIEW
Your Company, a Mini Ratna (Cat-I) company, 
continued to operate with seven Regional 
Institutes (RIs) located at Asansol, Dhanbad, 
Ranchi, 
Nagpur, 
Bilaspur, 
Singrauli 
& 
Bhubaneswar and its Headquarter at Gondwana 
Place, Kanke Road, Ranchi. 
During FY 2025-26, CMPDIL continued to 
strengthen its strategic focus on diversifying 
its consultancy portfolio and expanding its 
presence beyond the CIL ecosystem. The 
Company enhanced its engagement with a 
wide spectrum of clients, including Central 
and State Government organizations, Public 
Sector Undertakings (PSUs), and private sector 
enterprises, thereby broadening its market reach 
and reinforcing its position as a leading mining 
consultancy organization.
The 
Company 
secured 
142 
consultancy 
assignments from clients outside CIL, with a 
cumulative order value of ₹131.02 crore during 
the year. This performance reflects CMPDIL's 
sustained efforts towards business diversification 
and its growing acceptance as a trusted 
consultancy partner across the mining and allied 
sectors.
CMPDIL also witnessed a significant expansion 
of its external client base by onboarding more 
than 40 new clients during FY 2025-26. 
In FY 2025-26, CMPDIL made noteworthy 
progress in expanding its consultancy footprint 
beyond Coal India Limited, recording steady 
growth in both the number of consultancy 
assignments 
undertaken 
and 
the 
overall 
value of contracts awarded. This achievement 
underscores the Company's strategic emphasis 
on 
service 
diversification, 
customer-centric 
solutions, and deeper engagement with clients 
across multiple sectors. Continuous efforts to 
enhance market outreach, deliver customized 
technical 
solutions, 
and 
maintain 
high 
standards of quality and professionalism have 
strengthened CMPDIL's competitive edge and 
further established its reputation as a reliable 
and preferred consultancy partner in the mining 
and infrastructure sectors.
Key achievements and initiatives in F.Y. 2025-
26 are:
• Diversification of Services: CMPDIL has 
continued 
to 
diversify 
its 
consultancy 
services beyond CIL, targeting public sector 
organizations, government entities (both 
central and state), and private agencies. Over 
the last seven financial years, CMPDIL has 
captured the largest share of jobs in both 
quantity and value. 
• Offers and Jobs: CMPDIL communicated 126 
offers worth ₹92.73 crores to clients during 
F.Y. 2025-26. The company secured 142 
consultancy jobs from outside CIL clients 
worth ₹131.02 crores during FY. 2025-26.
• Key Projects: CMPDIL conducted scientific 
sand replenishment studies for rivers in Bihar, 
25 districts in Uttar Pradesh, and various rivers 
in Rajasthan.Secured work for international 
assignment of ICVL for preparation of DPR for 
Tete East Project of ICVL Mozambique.
DIRECTORS' REPORT



	
39
•	 Expansion of Client Base: CMPDIL has 
significantly expanded its client base outside 
of CIL, adding more than 40 new clients during 
F.Y. 2025-26,reflecting sustained efforts to 
expand its footprint across diverse sectors 
and geographies.
•	 REE Block License & Entry into Critical 
Minerals: Secured the REE Exploration 
License for the Navatala-Deogarh Block 
(Rajasthan).  Enabled CIL to obtain the Ontillu 
REE License through transaction advisory. 
These achievements mark CMPDIL’s strategic 
entry into the critical mineral exploration 
domain, supporting future diversification.
During FY 2025-26, CMPDIL strengthened 
its strategic partnerships by entering into 
Memoranda of Understanding (MoUs) with 
reputed organizations such as RITES Limited 
and Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited (BSNL) to 
collaborate on new consultancy assignments 
and explore emerging business opportunities. 
In addition, several strategic MoUs, including 
one with NTPC Mining Limited (NML), are at 
various stages of finalization and are expected to 
further enhance the Company's service portfolio, 
technical capabilities, and business prospects. 
These collaborations are aimed at leveraging 
complementary expertise, fostering innovation, 
and promoting sustainable and technologically 
advanced mining practices.
The Company also continued its focused efforts 
to enhance its visibility and brand presence 
beyond the Coal India ecosystem through 
active participation in national and international 
seminars, 
conferences, 
exhibitions, 
and 
technology expos. Simultaneously, CMPDIL 
intensified its business development initiatives 
by engaging in regular one-to-one interactions 
with prospective and existing clients to better 
understand their requirements and provide 
customized 
consultancy 
solutions. 
These 
sustained efforts have significantly strengthened 
CMPDIL's presence in the consultancy market 
outside CIL, resulting in increased business 
opportunities, a more diversified client portfolio, 
and enhanced recognition as a trusted and 
preferred consultancy organization in the mining 
and allied infrastructure sectors.
1.1	
Major Services Offered
•	 Geological Exploration & Drilling
	
Detailed 
geological 
exploration 
of 
regionally explored blocks with a view 
to generate reliable geological and 
geo-engineering data and assess in-
situ coal reserve for preparation of 
mining 
project 
report; 
geophysical 
survey through multi-probe geophysical 
logging; high resolution shallow seismic 
survey; hydro geological investigation 
and identification of coal bed methane 
resources.
•	 Project Planning & Design
	
Preparation 
of 
feasibility 
reports, 
detailed project reports and detailed 
engineering drawings for underground 
and opencast mines, master plans 
of 
coalfields, 
coal 
and 
mineral 
beneficiation and utilisation plants, 
coal handling plants, workshops and 
other ancillary units and infrastructure 
facilities including techno-economic 
evaluation of various schemes and 
project reports for investment decisions.
•	 Engineering Services
	
Detailed design of system and sub-
system for mines, beneficiation and 
utilisation plants, coal handling plants, 
power supply systems, workshops and 
other units, architectural planning & 
design.
•	 Research & Development
	
Serving as nodal agency for all S&T 
schemes funded by Ministry of Coal and 
R&D schemes funded by R&D Board of


40
CIL. CMPDIL, on its own, also takes 
up applied research and development 
in the field of mining, beneficiation, 
utilisation, environment, exploration, 
etc.
•	 Laboratory Services
	
Well-equipped 
state 
of 
the 
art 
laboratories 
are 
providing 
quality 
analysis of mine gases, air, water, 
noise, coal core sample, washability 
characteristics 
of 
coal, 
physico-
mechanical 
strength 
of 
strata, 
petrography studies, Non-Destructive 
Testing (NDT), etc.
•	 Environmental Services
	
Preparation 
of 
Environment 
Management Plan, its implementation 
and 
monitoring 
through 
Regional 
Institutes and Headquarters; analysis 
of air, water, noise samples at in-
house CPCB approved laboratories; 
Preparation of Mine closure plan and 
monitoring of mine closure; Slope 
stability study for OB and Highwall; 
Environmental carrying capacity of 
mines and study of riverine ecosystem; 
Utilisation of remote sensing satellite 
data for land use monitoring for entire 
CIL mines, etc. 
•	 Information Technology
•	 Human Resource Development
•	 Specialised Services
	 Geomatics 
including 
Remote 
Sensing  
	 Ventilation & Gas survey in mines
	 Controlled Blasting
	 Performance evaluation of new 
explosives
	 Mining Electronics
	 Mine capacity Assessment
	 Mine Support Design, Rock Mass 
Rating (RMR)
	 Non-Destructive Testing
	 Management System Consultancy 
	 Measurement of Coal and OBR
1.2	
Financial Working Results
	
During the year under review your 
Company earned a Profit after Tax of Rs. 
613.18 Crores.  The working results of the 
company are given below:
(` In Crores) 
Particulars
Year 
ending 
31.03.2026 
Year 
ending 
31.03.2025
Net Sales 
2316.53 
2102.76
Other Income
 80.92
74.77
Total expenses
1573.81 
1295.39
Profit Before Tax
 823.64
882.14
Tax Expenses
 210.46
215.23
Profit After Tax (A)
 613.18
666.91
Other Comprehensive 
Income (OCI)
4.17 
(20.83)
Income Tax that will be 
reclassified to Profit or 
Loss
 1.05
(5.24)
Total Other Comprehensive 
Income (B)
 3.12
(15.59)
Total Comprehensive 
Income (A) + (B)
616.30
651.32
1.3	
Management 
Discussion 
and 
Analysis Report
	
The 
Management 
of 
Central 
Mine 
Planning & Design Institute Ltd. (CMPDIL) 
presents its Discussion and Analysis 
report covering the different matters of 
importance, including performance and 
outlook of the Company.
1.3.1	 Major objectives of CMPDIL:
1.	 To provide consultancy support in coal 
and mineral exploration, including 
geological, geophysical, hydrological 
and environmental data generation.
2.	 To improve quality of exploration and



	
41
feasibility reports providing higher 
level of confidence of geological 
assessment 
for 
optimum 
mine 
planning.
3.	 To optimize generation of internal 
resources by improving productivity of 
resources, preventing wastage and to 
mobilize adequate external resources 
to meet investment need.
4.	 Project planning and designing for 
Coal mines, Coal beneficiation and 
Utilization Plants, etc.
5.	 To promote, co-ordinate and ensure 
effectiveness of research activities 
in coal sector under S&T and R&D 
Schemes.
6.	 To 
undertake 
formulation 
of 
Environmental 
Management 
Plans 
(EMPs), 
Environment 
Impact 
Assessment (EIA) and Mine Closure 
Plans for coal mining and related 
projects.
7. 	 Extending remote sensing services 
for 
land 
reclamation 
monitoring, 
environmental 
data 
generation, 
vegetation cover mapping, coal mine 
fire mapping, large scale topographical 
mapping of coalfields, infrastructure 
planning including selection of TPS 
and Washery locations, etc.
8. To 
provide 
field 
and 
laboratory 
services to Subsidiary Coal Producing 
Companies of CIL.
9.	 To provide consultancy services to 
outside organizations other than CIL 
and its subsidiaries.
1.3.2	 Brief of functions of CMPDIL:
	
A brief description of all the functions of 
CMPDIL is given below:
a.	 Geological Exploration and support 
Services– This core function of 
CMPDIL since its inception offers the 
following services for mineral deposits:
•	 Planning 
and 
execution 
of 
exploration;
•	 Resource 
evaluation 
and 
documentation for investment and 
exploitation decisions; and
• Related field tests and laboratory 
support for Coal and Non Coal 
Samples.
b.	 Planning, 
Design 
and 
Support 
Services– Being another core function 
of CMPDIL since 	 inception, 
the 
following services are offered for 
construction and operation of mining, 
beneficiation, utilization and other 
infrastructure and engineering projects.
•	 Formulation and / or evaluation 
of conceptual / pre-feasibility / 
feasibility studies, project reports, 
and basic and detailed engineering 
designs;
•	 Engineering and other related 
consultancy support; and
• Related field tests and laboratory 
support for Coal and Non Coal 
Samples.
c.	 Environmental 
Management 
Services - Offered since 1992, these 
cover all round support to mining and 
mineral industry for environmental 
management during their planning and 
operations, including Mine Closure 
Planning, laboratory and test support, 
study of riverine ecosystem, soil and 
moisture conservation studies, etc.
d.	 Geomatics Services – Offered since 
2001, the following services are 
covered:
• Differential GPS survey for mining 
lease and forest boundary, OBR/Coal 
Check Measurement, Correlation 
Survey of UG Mines, etc.
•	 Remote Sensing studies including 
Coal Mine Fire Mapping, Land 
reclamation monitoring of opencast 
mines, Land Use/Vegetation Cover 
Mapping of Coalfields, etc.


42
•	 Topographical Survey, 
•	 Site selection of Thermal/Solar Power 
Stations based on Satellite Data, GIS 
& Drones
•	 Drone based survey and mapping 
services.
e.	 Human Resource Development– 
These cover technical, managerial and 
management-systems related training 
to the market clientele, particularly in 
mineral and mining sector.
f.	 Management 
System 
Services– 
Offered since 1997, these cover 
complete range of consultancy and 
support for creation, documentation, 
implementation 
and 
training 
for 
various 
management 
systems 
standards, e.g. ISO 9001, ISO 14001, 
OHSAS 18001, SA 8000, ISO 50001, 
ISO 27001 and ISO 37001. CMPDIL, 
with all its Regional Institutes, have 
been licensed by Bureau of Indian 
Standards 
for 
fulfilment 
of 
the 
requirements of the new revised ISO 
9001:2015 standard. 
g.	 Specialised 
Services– 
Expert 
consultancy services are also offered 
in the field of Ventilation & Gas 
survey in mines, Controlled Blasting, 
Performance 
evaluation 
of 
new 
explosives, Coal Bed Methane (CBM)/ 
Coal Gasification related services, 
Mining Electronics, Mine Capacity 
Assessment, 
Physico 
Mechanical 
properties (PMP) testing of Rock and 
Coal, Mine Support Design, Rock 
Mass Rating (RMR), Strata Control & 
Monitoring Plan (SCAMP) study, Non-
Destructive Testing, Development of 
Apps & portals for CIL & MoC, etc.
1.3.3 	 Industry Structure and Development
	
The 
global 
economic 
environment 
remains uncertain, shaped by geopolitical 
tensions, trade disruptions, and divergent 
growth and inflation outcomes across 
major economies. While global activity 
has shown resilience in the near term, 
underlying vulnerabilities persist, including 
elevated fiscal pressures, fragmented 
supply chains, and an increased reliance 
on economic policy instruments for 
strategic purposes.
	
As per International Monetary Fund 
(IMF), global growth is projected to be 3.1 
percent in 2026 and 3.2 percent in 2027, 
slower than its recent pace of about 3.4 
percent in 2024–25. Indian economy has 
maintained strong growth momentum in 
FY26 with GDP growth estimated at 7.4 
per cent, with growth largely driven by 
domestic demand. The outlook for FY27 
is shaped by stable macroeconomic 
fundamentals, sustained policy support, 
and broad-based sectoral performance 
alongside evolving external conditions. 
India’s potential growth is estimated at 
around 7 per cent for FY27 positioning the 
economy on a path of steady expansion 
amid a challenging global environment. 
	
Mining in India is a major economic 
activity which contributes significantly 
to the economy of the country. The coal 
mining and electricity generation are two 
of the eight core industries and together 
contribute about 12% to India’s Index of 
Industrial Production (IIP) affirming their 
importance to the economy. Further, 
India’s logistics industry, sponge iron 
industry, 
aluminum 
industry 
among 
several others depend on India’s domestic 
coal industry.
	
Coal mining often gives stimulus to the 
local economy, both directly and indirectly, 
through creation of jobs, by inducing 
improvement in local infrastructure - 
such as road network and water supply, 
and allowing the local population to have 
better access to health and education 
services. India's coal sector continues 
to play a vital role in fueling the nation's 
energy 
needs 
while 
simultaneously



	
43
driving significant employment growth. 
The coal sector’s success is attributed to 
the tireless efforts of Coal Public Sector 
Undertakings (PSUs), private players, 
and the dedicated workforce of around 5 
lakh mine workers across more than 370 
coal mines. Hence, the importance of the 
coal sector to India, not just in terms of an 
energy source for the country, but also for 
the socio-economic role it plays, cannot 
be denied. 
	
India is the second largest producer of 
coal and has the 5th largest coal reserves 
globally. 
During 
the 
year 
2025-26, 
domestic coal production reached to a 
level of 1041 million tonne. CIL was the 
major contributor with a production of 
about 768 million tonne which is expected 
to increase to a level of 1000 million 
tonne, at the earliest, by 2028-29. Despite 
the significant increase in domestic 
production during the last five years, the 
country is consistently importing 200+ MT 
coal annually to meet the coal demand. 
Coal demand is projected to peak in the 
decade 2030-2040 with National coal 
production reaching to a level of 1.50 
billion tonne by 2035. 
	
Coal will remain as the major contributor 
towards the power generation in India at 
least for the next decade or two. India’s 
dependence on coal remains significant 
as it contributes 55% to the national 
energy mix and fuelling over 74% of total 
power generation. Though investments 
have been increasing for non-renewable 
sector, the contributory requirements in 
absolute terms still remain higher for coal.
	
In order to meet the objective of 
Aatmanirbhar Bharat, India has to strive 
to meet the demand of coal through its 
own resources. In addition, on account of 
Panchamrit commitments at the COP26, 
there is likely a gradual transition in 
the country’s energy landscape. In this 
evolving policy environment, efforts have 
to be made to enhance the coal production 
as well as to diversify into alternative 
and value-added end uses of coal. This 
transition presents an opportunity for 
CMPDIL to support for enhanced coal 
production and to develop alternate use 
of coal, expand expertise in renewable 
energy sector and provide consultancy 
to coal companies to diversify their 
businesses to be future ready.
	
The government has set ambitious 
renewable energy goals that include the 
development of 60% of nation’s installed 
energy capacity from renewables by 2035. 
Though there is thrust on renewables, 
coal will continue to have fair share in 
India’s energy mix for energy security 
of the country and CMPDIL is ready to 
provide technical assistance for alternate 
sustainable coal usage, low carbon & 
sustainable coal mining and renewable 
energy.
	
The total estimated basinal area of 
Gondwana Coalfields (44 nos.) and 
Tertiary Coalfields (18 nos.) is assessed 
to be about 67,159 sq km, while the 
total prognosticated coal bearing area 
of the country stood at about 32,761 sq 
km as on 01.04.2025. Out of the total 
prognosticated coal bearing area, total 
regional exploration area measured was 
about 21,006 sq km and about 11,755 sq 
km area is left-out for regional exploration. 
The total basinal area of Tertiary Coalfields 
was estimated to be about 1,367 sq km, 
out of which, a total of about 853 sq km 
was assessed to be prognosticated coal 
bearing area.
	
As per the directive of the Government, 
CMPDIL is undertaking Regional and 
Detailed Exploration activities with a 
strong focus on 2D/3D Seismic Surveys 
across the country. The objective is to 
identify and delineate the most promising 
coal-bearing properties for accelerated 
coal exploitation. This initiative aims to


44
expedite the availability of coal blocks for 
prospective bidders, thereby maximizing 
the utilization of the nation's coal 
resources.
 
Coal blocks are being identified for 
auction based on a set of well-defined 
criteria to ensure faster and sustainable 
resource development. Mining Lease 
(ML) is proposed for blocks explored in 
G1 level, while Prospecting License-cum-
Mining Lease (PL-cum-ML) is considered 
for regionally explored blocks (G2 and 
G3 levels). Environmental considerations 
such as overlap with Eco-Sensitive 
Zones (ESZ), forest cover, significant 
surface constraints such as habitation, 
infrastructure, and other restrictions are 
taken into consideration before being 
put into auction, ensuring smoother 
operational readiness for successful 
bidders.
	
The target of 12.0 lakh metre of drilling 
along with data acquisition through 2D/3D 
Seismic Survey of 475 Line km have 
been proposed for 2026-27 with an aim 
to have thrust on 2D/3D seismic surveys 
in exploration in combination with the 
physical drilling with reduced borehole 
density.
	
The exploration and planning exercises 
have been completed for the 1 Bt coal 
production target of CIL but, the technical 
support would be required by CIL from 
CMPDIL on continual basis for sustenance 
and further enhancement of the production 
in future. This will be true also for the 
infrastructural facilities, including CHPs, 
washeries, etc. Additionally, CMPDIL’s 
expert services are sought by other coal 
producers in public and private sectors 
as well. CMPDIL rendered consultancy 
services for other than CIL companies 
and various Commercial Coal Block 
Owners. Stride of coal companies, mainly 
of CIL, towards meeting the coal demand 
from indigenous supply will have a spurt 
in CMPDIL's services in coming years.
	
CMPDIL is actively pursuing diversification 
into 
coal-based 
alternative 
energy 
resources such as Coal Bed Methane and 
Underground Coal Gasification, which 
are expected to create new business 
opportunities and strengthen its role 
in the evolving energy landscape. The 
organization has established a well-
equipped Clean Energy Laboratory and 
has been generating CBM-specific data 
since the 10th Five Year Plan and shale 
gas-specific data since the 12th Five 
Year Plan under Promotional, Regional 
and Detailed Exploration programmes, 
thereby developing a comprehensive data 
bank for the Ministry of Coal.
	
CMPDIL continues to act as the Principal 
Implementing Agency (PIA) for execution 
of CBM projects in CIL command 
areas, including ECL, BCCL and SECL. 
CMPDIL 
also 
possesses 
significant 
technical expertise to offer consultancy 
services in CBM development, including 
data generation, coal characterization, 
Gas Initially-in-Place (GIIP) estimation, 
reservoir simulation, and techno-economic 
feasibility studies. The organization is 
extending such specialized services to 
external clients and is actively expanding 
its customer base. Further, Underground 
Coal 
Gasification 
(UCG) 
is 
being 
developed as a strategic focus area.
	
Additionally, emerging area of Information 
and Communication Technology (ICT) in 
coal sector is also presenting additional 
opportunities for CMPDIL which will 
increase further in coming years.
	
Though the coal fuel is expected to retain 
its primacy in India and remain the only 
realistic option for providing affordable 
and reliable source of energy for the local 
population at least in foreseeable furute, 
the Government’s commitment to exploit 
the renewable sources of energy in a big 
way, parallely, is likely to impact the future



	
45
growth of the coal sector. Revised NDC 
targets for the year 2031-35 include (i) 60 
per cent of its energy requirements from 
renewable energy by 2035, (ii) reduction 
of the carbon intensity of the economy by 
47 per cent by 2035, and (iii) to create 
an additional carbon sink of 3.5 to 4 
billion tonne of CO2 equivalent through 
additional forest and tree cover by 2035. 
Moreover, requirement of compliances 
under 
environment/forest 
clearances, 
pressure from the Green lobbyists as 
well as efforts required in land acquisition 
for coal mining are going to be tougher 
day-by-day. CMPDIL will have to provide 
technical assistance to coal companies for 
low carbon, environmentally acceptable 
and socially inclusive mine planning for 
the coal sector.
	
Exploration has been a key driver 
of revenue for CMPDIL. To ensure 
sustained growth and enhance future 
earnings, CMPDIL is actively pursuing 
a diversification strategy that extends 
beyond coal. This approach involves 
expanding our exploration activities into 
non-coal sectors while also broadening 
our range of service offerings - most 
notably, the in-house execution of 2D 
seismic surveys. These initiatives aim to 
strengthen both our top and bottom lines.
	
As part of this strategic shift, and with 
support from NMEDT funding, CMPDIL 
has successfully completed three bauxite 
exploration projects in Jharkhand. In 
addition, two projects on base metal 
exploration (copper, lead and zinc) has 
been completed. One more exploration 
projects for magnetite is currently under 
progress. Further, 2 blocks for exploration 
of Graphite have also been granted 
by Directorate of Geology, Odisha for 
implementation through NMEDT funding. 
CMPDIL has actively participated in the 
first tranche of auction for exploration 
license by Govt. of India and successfully 
acquired one REE exploration license 
block – Nawatala Devigarh in the state 
of Rajasthan. CMPDIL also acted as 
a transactional advisor for CIL in the 
acquisition of the Ontillu Chandragiri REE 
block in Andhra Pradesh in the 1st tranche 
of auction. 
 
Also, more efforts are being made 
to increase revenue from other fast 
growing services like Geomatics and 
Environmental Services. These services 
present significant growth opportunities 
and allow us to provide comprehensive 
solutions to our clients. Furthermore, 
CMPDIL is actively prioritizing specialized 
hydrogeological services to capitalize on 
emerging market trends and meet the 
evolving needs of our customers.
	
Considering the above and to infuse 
dynamism in business domain of CMPDIL, 
it will be realistic to ensure enhancement 
in the exploration capacity through further 
productivity improvement and particularly, 
through wider use of 2D/3D Seismic 
Survey and other geo-physical methods, 
upgradation and modernization of existing 
facilities and infrastructure wherever 
required, 
rationalizing 
manpower 
utilization 
and 
executive 
manpower 
induction, diversification in newer areas 
of mineral, mining and allied engineering 
sectors other than coal, enhancing 
quantum of outside jobs (non-CIL) in value 
terms, establishing effective monitoring 
system in core areas including drilling and 
inventory control through computerization 
and networking, establishing technology 
for development of alternative sources of 
coal based energy, etc.
1.3.4	 Strategy adopted to realize above 
objectives:
	
With the depth of knowledge and market 
place CMPDIL has in mineral, mining and 
allied sectors, it is adopting the following 
strategies and business plan to realize its


46
corporate objectives:
(i)	
Enhancing 
exploration 
capacity 
through wider application of 2D/3D 
seismic survey in place of physical 
drilling to the extent possible, etc.
(ii) 
Diversification 
in 
newer 
areas 
of 
mineral, 
mining 
and 
allied 
engineering sectors other than coal,
(iii)	 Increasing market share for outside 
clients in revenue,
(iv)	 Tie-up with strategic partners, both, 
within and outside the country,
(v)	
Upgradation and modernization of 
existing facilities and infrastructure,
(vi)  Increasing operational efficiency and 
work quality,
(vii)	 Improving corporate culture and 
internal systems,
(viii)	 Rationalizing manpower utilization 
and executive manpower induction 
to ensure continued planning and 
specialized support to the coal 
industry,
(ix)	 Better cost control measures and 
monitoring, and
(x)	
Rendering 
services 
towards 
development 
of 
coal 
based 
alternative source of energy.
(xi)	 Digital and IT Technology.
1.3.5	 Strength and Weakness
	
Strength
•	
CMPDIL 
is 
a 
multi-disciplinary 
organization, perhaps one of its kind, 
providing almost all the services prior to 
mining, during the mining operation and 
post mining operations under one roof.
•	
Domination 
over 
detailed 
coal 
exploration in India. CMPDIL is 
recognized as the most preferred 
consultant amongst Indian clients 
besides 
having 
government 
‘preferences’.
•	
With the strategically located Regional 
Institutes, it is able to provide door-
step service to all the subsidiaries of 
Coal India Ltd. along with the Ministry 
of Coal. CMPDIL has a ‘Pan-India’ 
presence in the vicinity of coal bearing 
areas. 
•	
CMPDIL enjoys the distinction of 
possessing a large, authentic data-
base relating to coal blocks, coal 
deposits, coal quality, etc. giving 
access to the knowledge of vast 
resources available in coal sector.
•	
It has a large talent bank of multi-
disciplinary skilled manpower.
•	
Has rich experience of executing 
integrated coal exploration projects, 
planning of  mining Project Reports 
with individual project capacity up to 
85 MTY opencast mine and 5 MTY 
underground mine, large number of 
infrastructural-facilities, etc.
•	
It has one of the largest infrastructure 
for 
coal 
exploration 
having 
geographical spread in 8 states, 
laboratory facilities, baseline data 
generation capacity, etc.
	
Weakness
•	
Majority 
of 
revenue 
from 
CIL 
subsidiaries & Ministry of Coal.
•	
High rate of superannuation of skilled 
and experienced executives and non-
executives.
• 
Slow 
diversification 
due 
to 
procurement bottlenecks for Global 
Technology Partnership.
1.3.6	 Opportunities and Threats
	
Opportunities
•	
The demand for coal is likely to 
increase and may peak during mid 
2030s providing scope for CMPDIL 
services.
•	
Auction/allotment of coal blocks to 
both public & private companies by



	
47
the Government have created market 
opportunities for CMPDIL outside CIL.
•	
Need to enhance the application of IT 
in coal sector.
• 
Diversification in non-coal sector REE, 
Critical Minerals, Gasification etc.
• 
Expansion of services in the field of 
exploitation of CBM/CMM/UCG/Other 
non-conventional energy resources.
•	
Technology based globally competitive 
consultancy.
	
Threats
•	
Indian coal sector is inching towards 
liberalization with 100% FDI. Further 
opening of the coal sector may result in 
market competition from international 
consultancy service providers.
•	
Over the years, the development 
in the field of renewable energy as 
alternative power sources is likely to 
increase which may make it cheaper 
impacting conventional coal related 
business of CMPDIL to some extent.
•	
Restriction in exploration in forest 
area and law and order problem are 
affecting the drilling operations in 
these areas. 
•	
Being a dominantly human resource 
driven company, present high age 
profile will prove detrimental in future. 
Expert manpower is depleting, as 
many of its experienced technical 
experts are superannuating.
1.3.7	 Pricing
	
Revenue from Consultancy Services 
by CMPDIL, a subsidiary of Coal India 
Limited:
	
Recognition of Revenue arising out of 
consultancy services for exploration, mine 
planning / project reports, environmental 
plans and other engineering services 
is based on pricing formula adopted for 
different categories of customers.
1.3.8	 Marketing Policy
	
CMPDIL 
is 
committed 
to 
provide 
consultancy services in all possible areas 
as and when demanded by Coal India 
Limited and its subsidiary companies on 
priority basis. However, CMPDIL is also 
proactively taking up jobs from outside 
CIL clients with due consideration of the 
importance and strategic values.
1.3.9	 Outlook and Preparedness
	
CMPDIL has shown a consistent upward 
trend in drilling activities and productivity 
over 
the 
years. 
Modernization 
of 
departmental drills, induction of new higher 
capacity mechanical and hydrostatic 
drills, introduction of high-performance 
bits resulting in higher productivity, 
adopting latest mud technology, effective 
arrangement of drilling accessories and 
manpower had been the key to augment 
the drilling capacity of CMPDIL.
	
In June 2023, the Cabinet Committee 
on 
Economic Affairs 
approved 
the 
continuation of Central Sector Schemes 
for exploration in coal and lignite 
during the 15th Finance Commission 
cycle, i.e., up to 2025–26. Consequent 
upon this approval, CMPDIL achieved 
approximately 11.50 lakh metres of drilling 
in 2025–26, registering a growth of about 
14% over the previous year. Considering 
the urgency of carrying out exploration in 
coal further, continuation of the funding 
under Central Sector Scheme of Ministry 
of Coal would be required.
	
In FY 2025-26, a total of 31 Geological 
Reports (GR) have been prepared. About 
11.8 billion tonnes of coal resources 
have been estimated in the Measured 
(Proved) 
category 
through 
Detailed 
Exploration covering an area of about 306 
sq km through 24 Geological Reports. In 
addition to this, about 3.7 billion tonnes 
of new coal resources (in Indicated and 
Inferred categories) are estimated through


48
Regional 
(Promotional) 
Exploration 
covering an area of about 109 sq km 
through 7 Geological Reports.
 
Seismic survey activities saw significant 
growth in 2025-26. CMPDIL carried out 
about 455.23 line km of 2D/3D seismic 
surveys in 2025-26, resulting in an 4% 
year-on-year 
growth 
which 
included 
about 345.59 line km of 2D surveys using 
departmental resources, reflecting a 15% 
increase compared to the previous year. 
A target of 12.0 lakh meter of drilling 
along with data acquisition through 2D/3D 
Seismic Survey of 475 Line km have been 
proposed for FY 2026-27.
	
Adding on to it, a total of 317 reports 
including 136 Ground Water Modeling 
(GWM) reports and 136 Comprehensive 
Hydrogeological Reports, were prepared 
during the year. Number of Ground 
Water Modelling (GWM) reports prepared 
increased significantly from 90 Reports 
in the FY 2024-25 to 136 reports in FY 
2025–26. This substantial rise in in-house 
reporting has effectively reduced the 
reliance on outsourcing for GWM report 
preparation.
	
During the year under review, a total of 
30 Project Reports (PRs) have been 
prepared which includes 19 PRs for 
Opencast Projects and 11 PRs for 
Underground Projects. One opencast PR 
has been prepared for Rabodih OCP (2.5 
Mty), a Non-CIL mine, of M/s Twenty First 
Century Mining Pvt. Ltd. 
	
During the year 2025-26, two major 
Opencast Projects namely Recast PR of 
Magadh OC (51 Mty), CCL and Expansion 
PR of Lakhanpur Belpahar Lilari OCP (50 
Mty), MCL have been planned. Two large 
Underground Projects namely Inguri UG 
(4 Mty), NCL and Labji Pusla sector-1 UG, 
(3 Mty), SECL have also been planned 
during the year 2025-26.
	
Capacities of all the laboratories in 
CMPDIL have been upgraded. Coal 
Characterisation Laboratory is accredited 
with NABL certification in accordance 
with the standard ISO/IEC 17025:2017 
for its facilities in the field of “TESTING” 
in 12 different scopes. The Geo-chemical 
laboratory is equipped with manual/
semi-automatic 
sample 
preparation 
units, Proximate Analyzers, Ultimate 
Analyzers, 
Bomb 
Calorimeters, 
Ash 
fusion temperature range Analyzer, HGI 
Apparatus, etc. The lab is also equipped 
with X-Ray Fluorescence system (XRF) 
facility which enables for performing 
Ash Analysis and other metal oxides. 
Direct Mercury Analyzer for determining 
Mercury (Hg) content in liquid and solid 
samples is available. Instruments such 
as Swelling Index, LTGK, Plastometer 
are 
also 
available 
for 
determining 
coking properties of coal. Recently, the 
laboratory has been equipped with X-Ray 
Diffractometer (XRD) system capable 
to analyse the presence of minerals in 
unknown samples, free silica in mine dust 
samples.
	
Non-coal 
samples 
(Base 
metals) 
preparation unit comprising vibratory 
cup mills and automatic Jaw crushers for 
sample preparation of desired sample size 
requirements has also been established 
recently in the lab. In the direction of 
establishment of Mineral Identification 
facility for Non-coal, CMPDIL is in the 
process of procurement of Rock cutting 
and polishing unit along with Reflected 
Light Polarizing Research microscope. 
Also, for qualitative and quantitative 
identification of Rare Earth Elements 
(REE) and trace metals, a fully operational 
ICP-MS (Inductively Coupled Plasma–
Mass Spectrometry) laboratory facility is 
under process of being established. 
	
The Petrography lab is equipped with 
Advance Petrological Microscopes for 
carrying Petrographic studies in which 
the maceral content (Coal type) and



	
49
reflectance percentage (Rank/Maturity) 
of 
coal 
samples 
are 
determined. 
Petrographic studies are imperative for 
ascertaining the suitability of given coal as 
blends in coke making. The Petrographers 
in Petrography Lab have been certified 
by International Committee of Coal and 
Organic Petrology (ICCP).
	
The Coal & Mineral Preparation (CMP) 
Laboratory is also accredited with NABL 
certification. 
Accreditation 
by 
such 
recognized body is considered as an 
essential step for facilitating mutual 
acceptance of test results. NABL continued 
accreditation to Non-Destructive Testing 
(NDT) laboratory of CMPDIL HQ, based 
on ISO/IEC 17025:2017 for its facilities/
scope, in the field of Non- Destructive 
Testing. NDT Cells have been established 
at different Regional Institutes of CMPDIL 
with proper equipment and resources. 
CMPDIL has a state-of-the-art Laboratory 
to provide services for CBM and Shale 
Gas specific analyses. These services 
include Gas Desorption Tests, Adsorption 
Isotherm 
Tests, 
Gas 
Composition 
Analysis, Rock Eval Pyrolysis, Total 
Organic Carbon (TOC), Helium Porosity 
& Permeability Tests, Mine Air Sample 
Analysis etc.
	
The 
Environmental 
Laboratory 
at 
CMPDIL (HQ), Ranchi was re-accredited 
by the National Accreditation Board 
for Testing & Calibration Laboratories 
(NABL) in accordance with the ISO/
IEC 17025:2017 standards for 170 
parameters. This accreditation remains in 
effect until 24th March 2029. The lab also 
holds accreditation as per Occupational 
Health and Safety Management System 
(OHSMS) IS/ISO 45001:2018 and is 
valid till 10.07.2028. Mining Technology 
(MT) Lab has been re-accredited with 
NABL Certification in accordance with the 
standard ISO/IEC 17025:2017 in the field 
of testing facilities which is valid until 4th 
May 2030.
	
CMPDIL is carrying out the work of GHG 
Estimation from Abandoned Wells and 
Coal Mines in collaboration with IIT(ISM), 
Dhanbad for submission of BTR-2 and 
BTR-3 reports to MoEF&CC for onward 
submission to IPCC under UNFCCC. 
This is the first time that MoEF&CC has 
entrusted this work to CMPDIL. CMPDIL 
has also carried out Comprehensive 
Study Report on Mine Water Utilisation 
for active and abandoned mine voids of 
CIL and submitted the report to CIL.
	
67 nos. of reports i.e. 21 nos. of 
Draft 
EIA/EMPs/Addendum 
EIA/EMP 
(Environmental 
Impact 
Assessment/
Environment 
Management 
Plans) 
and 
46 
nos. 
Form-I/Form-IV/Form-
VI were prepared during 2025-26 and 
Environmental Monitoring of 303 projects/
clusters/establishments 
of 
CIL 
was 
carried out through eight environmental 
laboratories located at Asansol, Dhanbad, 
Nagpur, Bilaspur, Bhubaneswar, Hasdeo, 
Jayant, and Ranchi. Some specialized


50
works like carrying capacity studies, 
ecological monitoring of mine, biodiversity 
assessment studies of reclamation sites, 
Sand Replenishment Studies, design 
of STP and ETP were also undertaken 
by CMPDIL.  Some special studies like 
Scientific Soil Moisture Conservation 
(SMC) Plan, Top Soil Management & 
Soil Erosion Plan; Green House Gas 
(GHG) Emission Study report, Carbon 
Sequestration Study report, Carrying 
Capacity 
Study 
report 
of 
Riverine 
Ecosystem and Pollution Reduction Study 
reports were also prepared for different 
mines of CIL subsidiary companies. 
CMPDIL 
is 
the 
largest 
Accredited 
Consultant Organization (ACO) in India 
for preparation of EIA & EMP and is 
having more than 100 nos. of approved 
experts to its credit.
less than 5 Mcm (Coal + OB) category 
which are monitored at an interval of 
three 
years 
in 
phase-wise 
manner 
under different subsidiaries of CIL, were 
successfully completed. Vegetation cover 
mapping of six coalfields, Core & Buffer 
zone mapping of 25 projects for EIA/ EMP 
preparation were also carried out during 
the year. GIS related job for determination 
of Carrying Capacity of NCL was also 
completed in the year. Thermal Infrared 
Satellite Data based mapping of thermal 
anomalies in fire affected Chirimiri OC 
was completed during the year.
	
CMPDIL has operationalized Drone/ UAV 
based Surveys for various applications 
related to mining. Some major projects 
executed during the year include Volume 
computation of Coal heaps in 8 mines 
of MCL, Sand Replenishment Studies of 
Sand Leases in the State of Rajasthan 
using Drone/ UAV based Photogrammetry.
	
Further, OBR Measurement of all OC 
mines, both outsourced and departmental, 
producing more than 1 MTY and the annual 
measurement of OC mines producing less 
than 1 MTY (only hired patches) using 
Terrestrial Laser Scanner have been 
completed and reports submitted. DGPS 
Survey for Coal Blocks under auction was 
successfully completed.
	
CMPDIL undertook a pioneering initiative 
for India’s first dry deshaling plant at 
Chitra Mine of ECL by preparing the 
Expression 
of 
Interest 
(EoI), 
which 
	
CMPDIL has been carrying out Satellite 
Data based Land Reclamation Monitoring 
of CIL mines on a regular basis based on 
high resolution satellite data since 2008. In 
FY 2025-26, Land Reclamation Monitoring 
of total 110 projects, comprising of 75 
Opencast Projects producing more than 
5 million cubic meter (Mcm) (Coal + OB) 
category which are monitored on annual 
basis and 35 mines/ Clusters producing



	
51
attracted six responses. It also developed 
the Conceptual Report and Notice Inviting 
Tender (NIT), and conducted a pre-NIT 
meeting on 21.03.2026 to incorporate 
feedback 
from 
prospective 
bidders. 
Feasibility Reports were prepared for 
deshaling plants/washeries at Balaram-
Hingula and Kulda-Garjanbahal in MCL 
and Bina-Kakri OCP in NCL. Additionally, 
CIL’s first model EPC bid document for 
washeries was developed to standardize 
and 
streamline 
tendering 
across 
subsidiaries. CMPDIL also prepared PFR 
and tender documents (RFQ-cum-RFP) for 
Dhori Washery (CCL) and New Moonidih 
Washery (BCCL). Services for setting up 
the Talabira Coal Washery at Talabira II & 
III OCP was also provided for NLCIL.
 
CMPDIL has continued its efforts to 
facilitate the commercial development of 
coal-based alternative energy resources 
and remains focused on advancing coal-
based unconventional resources such as 
Coal Bed Methane and Coal Gasification 
for CIL and its subsidiaries, with the 
objective of enhancing resource utilization 
and creating new avenues for growth. 
CMPDIL is the Principal Implementing 
Agency (PIA) for ECL, BCCL and SECL 
for the development of CBM.
	
Three CBM blocks namely Jharia CBM 
Block-I, 
Raniganj 
CBM 
Block 
and 
Jharia CBM Block-II are presently under 
consideration in CIL Leasehold area. 
Jharia CBM Block-I (BCCL leasehold 
area) has been awarded to M/s Prabha 
Energy Limited (PEL) for extraction of 
CBM on revenue sharing basis. The 
Block is currently under Exploration 
Phase. Drilling of 5 Exploratory Coreholes 
and 4 Test Wells have been completed. 
Raniganj and Jharia CBM Block-II have 
been proposed to be developed after 
selection of CBM developer through 
tendering. CMPDIL is carrying out job of 
CBM specific Data generation for MoC 
and outside clients also.
	
CMPDIL has signed a Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU) with Directorate 
General of Hydrocarbons (DGH) in 
May 2025 for collaboration in data 
sharing and technology transfer related 
to the development of unconventional 
hydrocarbon resources such as Coal 
Bed Methane (CBM) and Shale Gas as 
a significant step towards enhancing 
cooperation in the energy sector.
	
In the area of Underground Coal 
Gasification, an R&D pilot project is being 
implemented by CMPDIL, ECL and Ergo 
Exergy Technology Inc. (EETI), Canada 
jointly. CMPDIL and ECL are the Principal 
Implementing 
Agencies 
and 
EETI, 
Canada is Sub-implementing agency. 
The project comprises of two phases of 
which Phase-I has been successfully 
completed on 31st May 2025. Phase-II, 
involving pilot plant design, construction, 
commissioning, operation, shutdown, and 
post-shutdown monitoring, is currently 
under implementation.
	
CMPDIL is the Nodal Agency to coordinate 
research activities funded under the 
S&T Grant of the Ministry of Coal and 
R&D Board of CIL. Besides coordination 
of different R&D works being carried 
out by various academic and research 
institutes/ organizations, CMPDIL, with 
its well-established laboratories, is also 
undertaking research in key areas of coal/
lignite mining industries. Over the years, 
many of these research projects have 
yielded considerable benefits resulting in 
operational improvement, safer working 
conditions, better resource recovery, 
and protection of the environment. While 
some research projects have produced a 
tangible impact on the industry directly, 
there are others which have strengthened 
mine planning, design, and technical 
services required by both operating mines 
and future mining projects.


52
	
Efforts are continuing by CMPDIL to involve more world-class scientific and research institutions 
in India and abroad in R&D activities so that it can fulfill the aspirations of the country by being 
Atma-Nirbhar. In line with the same, a National Centre for Coal and Energy Research (NaCCER), 
has been established at CMPDIL, Ranchi. This centre is dedicated to foster collaboration 
between national and international experts, ensure the integration of cutting-edge technologies 
and knowledge sharing in mining, energy efficiency, and clean coal solutions.
 
Emphasis is being made on diversification of R&D initiatives by taking up new projects in 
the field of environmental sustainability, energy management & digitization, reduction of 
carbon emission, renewable energy, use of AI & IoT, waste to wealth creation, deployment of 
new techniques in exploration, etc. During the year, 13 nos. of research projects have been 
completed and 40 ongoing research projects being executed in association with reputed 
organizations.
	
CMPDIL is facilitating for implementation of Management System standards in all subsidiaries of 
Coal India Limited and providing consultancy services for application of different Management 
System standards, like ISO 9001, ISO 14001, ISO 45001, ISO 50001, ISO/IEC 27001, ISO 
37001, etc. CMPDIL, with all its Regional Institutes, has been licensed by Bureau of Indian 
Standards for ISO 9001:2015 – Quality Management System (QMS). CMPDIL HQ, Ranchi 
has also implemented and is certified for ISO 37001:2016 – Anti Bribery Management System. 
Under our guidance & support, CIL HQ, Kolkata has got certification against ISO 9001:2015, 
ISO 14001:2015 and ISO 50001:2018 and three Subsidiaries of CIL i.e. ECL, NCL, and MCL 
are re-certified for Integrated Management System (ISO 9001:2015, ISO 14001:2015 and ISO 
45001:2018).
	
CMPDIL has played an important role in the auction of Coal Blocks for Commercial Mining 
conducted by Ministry of Coal. Mine Dossiers and Mine Summaries were submitted by CMPDIL 
for the coal blocks selected by MoC for different tranches of auction. Additionally, important 
input data for tendering purpose were also made available to MoC by CMPDIL for all these coal 
blocks. 133 coal blocks have been successfully auctioned till 13rd tranche of auction by Ministry 
of Coal. CMPDIL also helps MoC in resolving technical issues associated with allocated coal 
blocks.
	
CMPDIL has developed the Coal e-Auction platform for auction of Coal as per the Single Window 
Mode Agnostic (SWMA) Scheme 2022. The development of Portal and its modifications has 
been done by NIC, MeitY, GoI, who is our technology partner for this project. The portal was 
formally inaugurated on 03.10.2023. More than 8000 bidders have registered themselves in 
the coal e-auction portal. Till March 2026, CMPDIL has successfully conducted 275 e-auctions 
for all subsidiaries of CIL for more than 166 million tonnes of coal. CMPDIL has re-developed 
its auction portal as per modified SWMA Coal e-Auction Scheme. CMPDIL is also developing 
portal for conducing auction of coal under modified SHAKTI Policy 2025 (Short Term) by 
engaging NIC as its technology partner.
	
CMPDIL, in collaboration with Telecommunications Consultants India Limited (TCIL), New 
Delhi, has established a dedicated “5G Centre of Excellence (CoE) – Use Case Test Lab” 
featuring a lab-scale 5G Captive Non-Public Network (CNPN). This initiative is aimed at 
accelerating digital transformation and strengthening the technological landscape of the coal 
sector. The 5G Use Case Test Lab serves as a robust platform for the development, testing, 
and customization of advanced 5G-enabled applications tailored to the specific operational



	
53
requirements of the coal industry.
	
To validate and operationalize 5G technology in opencast mining environments, CMPDIL in 
collaboration with CDAC, Thiruvananthapuram has undertaken an R&D project titled “5G 
Captive Non-Public Network (CNPN) for Integrated Voice, Video & Data Communication in 
Opencast Coal Mines” at Amlohri Opencast Mine of Northern Coalfields Limited (NCL), Singrauli. 
For underground mining applications, CMPDIL, in association with ITI Limited, Lucknow, 
is also executing an R&D project titled “Automation, Control & Wireless Communication in 
Underground Mines on 4G LTE/5G Ready Communication Network” at Jhanjhra Mine of 
Eastern Coalfields Limited (ECL). This project focuses on enhancing safety, automation, and 
communication infrastructure in underground mining operations.
1.3.10	 Segment-wise performance
	
Operational performance across segments has been supported by improved execution, 
enhanced utilization of available resources, and emphasis on efficiency improvement. 
Segment-wise achievement during FY 2025-26 vis-à-vis FY 2024-25 is summarized below:
Segment
Net Sales
Expenses
Operating Profit
FY 2025-26
FY 2024-25
FY 2025-26
FY2024-25
FY 2025-26
FY2024-25
Exploration
1,110.55
970.84
947.08
781.53
163.47
189.31
Planning & 
Design
453.13
445.28
416.86
343.78
36.27
101.50
Geomatics
348.73
326.94
76.71
57.99
272.02
268.95
Environment
404.12
359.70
133.16
112.09
270.96
247.61
Total
2,316.53
2,102.76
1,573.81
1,295.39
742.72
807.37
	
Note: The increase in Expenses under the head ‘Salary and Wages’ during FY 2025-26 was 
mainly on account of Provision of Rs.90 Crore created for pay upgradation of Junior and Mid-
Level Executives.
1.3.11	 MOU between CMPDIL & CIL
	
For every Financial Year, CMPDIL enters into an MoU with its Holding company, Coal India 
Limited, to set various parameter for physical and financial performances along with certain 
compliance parameters with negative marking for non-compliance as per the guideline of 
Dept. of Public Enterprises (DPE). CMPDIL has been awarded with Excellent MoU rating from 
2007-08 to 2023-24 except for three years when it was rated ‘Very Good’. MoU for 2024-25 
with ‘Excellent’ rating has also been approved by CIL.
1.3.11	 Risks and Concerns
• 
A significant portion of our revenues is derived from Coal India Limited and its subsidiaries. 
Any decline in demand for our services from CIL could have an adverse impact on our 
business, results of operations, financial condition and cash flows.
•	
Our drilling and exploration activities are primarily dependent on government funding, and 
any shifts in policy decisions, changes in fiscal priorities or budget reallocation may have 
an adverse impact on our business. Further Any decline in demand for our geological 
exploration and resource evaluation services could have an adverse impact on our 
business.


54
•	
Changes in technology may render 
our current technologies obsolete. Any 
failure on our part to effectively address 
such situations, innovate and keep 
up with technological advancements, 
could adversely affect our business, 
results of operations, financial condition 
and cash flows.
•	
Our exploration activities are subject to 
the risk of adverse local law and order 
situations, which may have an adverse 
impact on our business, results of 
operations, financial conditions and 
cash flows.
•	
We face a risk of reduced demand of 
our services due to the emergence of 
renewable energy as an alternative 
source of energy. Significant shift 
towards sustainable energy solutions 
may have an adverse impact on 
our business, results of operations, 
financial conditions and cash flows.
1.3.13	 Internal Control Systems
•	
CMPDIL has robust internal control 
systems and processes in place 
for smooth and efficient conduct of 
business and complies with relevant 
laws and regulations.
•	
A comprehensive delegation of power 
exists for smooth decision making.
•	
Elaborate guidelines for preparation of 
accounts are followed consistently for 
uniform compliance.
•	
Audit committee is formed to keep a 
watch on compliance with internal 
control systems.
•	
Internal 
audits 
are 
conducted 
by 
Chartered 
Accountants/Cost 
Accountant Firms.
•	
Internal control framework has been 
developed identifying key controls and 
supervision of operational efficiency of 
designed key control by internal audit.
•	
Whistle Blower policy has been 
adopted and is being followed.
•	
In compliance of the provisions under 
the Companies Act and as per the CIL’s 
guideline in respect of risk management, 
a Risk Management Committee with a 
Board level member as its head has 
been constituted at CMPDIL.
1.3.14	 Material 
Development 
in 
Human 
Resources
	
CMPDIL, as a subsidiary of Coal India 
Limited and a Central Public Sector 
Enterprise, adheres to the compensation 
frameworks mandated by the Government 
of India. The pay scales, allowances, 
and service benefits for Non-Executive 
employees are governed by the National 
Coal Wage Agreement (NCWA), usually 
revised every five years through collective 
bargaining. Similarly, the remuneration for 
Executive cadre employees is determined 
based on the recommendations of the 
Pay Revision Committee (PRC), subject 
to the directives of the Department of 
Public Enterprises (DPE), and is generally 
reviewed once every ten years.
	
During 2025-26, 79 nos. of executives 
have been posted in CMPDIL through 
transfer & recruitment and 19 nos. of non-
executives have been posted in CMPDIL 
through transfer from other subsidiaries 
& appointment through compassionate 
ground as per provision of National Coal 
Wage Agreement (NCWA). 49 nos. of 
executives and 12 nos. of non-executives 
have been transferred from CMPDIL to 
other subsidiaries of CIL during the year. 
Moreover, efforts for transfer of qualified 
manpower from other subsidiaries to 
cater to the present and future workload 
of mine planning in CMPDIL is being 
undertaken. 111 nos. of Non-Executive 
employees have been upgraded to higher 
post through Departmental Selection in 
the year 2025-26.



	
55
	
CMPDIL also provides continuous training and development opportunities to its employees, 
middle and senior management executives, other officers and management trainees. In addition, 
company also arranges external training programs and international training sessions outside 
India. The company is also leveraging digital learning platforms such as iGOT to facilitate 
structured and self-paced capacity building. The detailed report on this matter is included in 
the relevant portion of the Report.
1.3.15	 Financial performance with respect to Operational Performance
Major Highlights
Particulars
FY 2025-26
FY 2024-25
Variation (%)
Total Income ₹ crore
2397.45
2177.53
10.10%
EBITDA on Net Sales %
33.57%
39.99%
-6.43%
Net Worth ₹ crore
2283.24
2041.85
11.82%
Dividend Per Share ₹
4.21
4.20
0.24%
Capex  ₹ crore
65.85
31.94
106.17%
	
Notes to Major Highlights
	
EBITDA = PAT+ Interest Expense (Finance Cost) + Taxes + Depreciation + Amortization - 
Other Income
	
Net Worth =   Equity Share Capital + Other Equity
 
Dividend Per Share (DPS) for the financial year represents the aggregate of the interim 
dividend(s) declared and paid during the year and the final dividend proposed by the Board of 
Directors for shareholder approval.
2500
2397.45
2177.53
10.10%
2 00
0
1500
Total Income
crore
`
Total Income
crore
`
2397.45
FY 2025-26
FY 2024-25
Variation
(%)
2177.53
10.10%
1000
500
0
40.00%
30.00%
20.00%
10.00%
-10.00%
0.00%
33.57%
39.99%
-6.43%
EBITDA on Net Sales %
EBITDA on Net Sales %
2397.45
FY 2025-26
FY 2024-25
Variation
(%)
2177.53
10.10%


56
1.3.15	Details of significant changes (i.e. changes of 25% or more as compared to the 
immediately previous financial year) in key financial ratios.
Ratio
For the Year ended 
31.03.2026
For the year ended 
31.03.2025
Variance
Debtors Turnover
2.28
2.17
0.11
Inventory Turnover   
NA
NA
NA
Interest Coverage Ratio
NA
NA
NA
Current Ratio
3.35
4.43
-1.08
Debt Equity Ratio  
NA
NA
NA
Operating Profit Margin (%) *
32.06%
38.40%
-6.33%
Net Profit Margin (%)
26.47%
31.72%
-5.25%
	
* Operating Profit Margin = PBT – Other Income / Revenue from Operations (Net of Levis)
1.3.16	 Details of any change in Return on Net Worth as compared to the immediately previous financial year 
along with a detailed explanation thereof.
	
Change in Return on Networth
Particulars
FY 2025-26
FY 2024-25
Change (%)
Operating Profit Margin %
33.57%
39.99%
-6.43%
Return on Networth %
26.86%
32.66%
-5.81%



	
57
1.4	
Financial Overview of CMPDIL
 
During the year the company made a profit after tax of Rs. 613.18 Crores The summary of the 
working results for the last three years is as follows:
Particulars
Performance of CMPDIL
FY 2023-24
FY 2024-25
FY 2025-26
1.
Profit before Taxes (Rs. in Crore) 
732.84 
882.14 
823.64 
2.
Profit after Taxes (Rs. in Crore) 
 503.23
 666.91
 613.18
3.
Turnover (Rs. in Crore)(Net Sales) 
1732.69
 2102.76
2316.53 
4.
Profit before tax to Turnover (%) 
 42.29
 41.95
35.55 
5.
Earnings per share (Rs.) 
7.05
9.34
8.59 
1.4.1 	 Explanation or Comments on Statutory Auditors Report and Secretarial Audit Report 
	
The report of Statutory Auditor and the explanations or comments by the Board on every 
qualification, reservation or adverse remark made by the Statutory Auditor is enclosed as 
Addendum-IV to the report.
	
The report of Secretarial Auditor and the explanations by the Management on a remark made 
by the Secretarial Auditor is enclosed as Addendum-V to the report.
1.4.2 	 Particulars of loans, guarantees or investments Under Section 186 of the Companies 
Act, 2013 
	
As per Section 186 of the Companies Act, 2013 the company should disclose to the members 
in the financial statement the full particulars of the loans given, investment made or guarantee 
given or security provided and the purpose for which the loan or guarantee or security is 
proposed to be utilised by the recipient of the loan or guarantee or security.
	
No loans given, no investment made or guarantee given or security provided to any person, 
firm or company. The details are reported in the financial statement.
1.4.3 	 State of Company Affairs
	
The paid up share capital of the company stands at Rs. 142.80 crores against the authorized 
capital of Rs. 150.00 crores. The general reserve stands at Rs. 103.28 crores and the surplus 
in P/L account stands at Rs 2037.16 crores (Including OCI) and totally constituting to the 
shareholder’s fund Rs. 2283.24 crores. Non-current liability Rs 98.14 crores and current 
liabilities Rs. 877.13 crores.
 
 The company owns net fixed assets of Rs. 242.91 Crores, Deferred tax assets (net) Rs. 32.18 
crores, other non–current assets Rs. 47.62 crores and current assets Rs. 2935.80 crores.
	
The total revenue from operations and other incomes stands at Rs. 2397.45 crores and after 
meeting all expenditure and taxes, the net profit stands at 613.18 crores. The earning per 
share (face value Rs 2 per share) works out Rs. 8.59.


58
1.4.4	 Capital Expenditure (Excluding GST) 
till 31st March, 2026
(` in Crores)
Particulars
2024-25
2025-26
Land & Building  
 8.47
37.24
Plant & Machine 
 15.29
14.99
Office equipment  
 0.66
8.85 
Furniture 
 3.05
1.20
Telecom 
 0.58
 0.21
Vehicle 
 1.81
0.33 
Software 
 2.08
3.03 
Total
 31.94
65.85 
	
The above total capex for F.Y. 2025-26 includes 
Green Technology of Rs. 0.52 crore
1.4.5	 Declaration of Interim Dividend
	
The Board of Directors, in its 295th Board 
Meeting held on 18th July, 2025, approved 
the First Interim Dividend for the Financial 
Year 2025-26 based on the working 
results of the Company for the period 
ended 30th June, 2025, at the rate of Rs. 
1.05 per equity share on 71,40,00,000 
equity shares of face value of Rs. 2/- 
each, involving an outgo of Rs. 74.97 
Crore, to be paid out of the profit after tax 
for the current financial year and surplus 
available in the Profit & Loss Account of 
the Company as on 30.06.2025.
	
Subsequently, the Board, in its 298th Board 
Meeting held on 25th & 26th October, 2025, 
approved the Second Interim Dividend for 
FY 2025-26 based on the working results 
up to 30th September, 2025, at the rate of 
Rs. 1.05 per equity share, involving an 
outgo of Rs. 74.97 Crore.
	
Further, in its 300th Board Meeting held on 
20th January, 2026 the Board approved 
the Third Interim Dividend for FY 2025-
26 based on the working results up to 31st 
December, 2025, at the rate of Rs. 1.05 
per equity share, involving an outgo of Rs. 
74.97 Crore.
1.4.6	 Material changes after 31.03.2026
	
No material changes and commitments 
to the best our knowledge affecting the 
financial position of the company have 
occurred between the end of the financial 
year of the company to which the financial 
statements relate and the date of the 
report.
1.5	
Corporate Governance:
	
Corporate Governance is a set of 
relationships 
between 
a 
company’s 
management, its Board, its shareholders 
and other stakeholders. It provides a 
principled process and structure through 
which the objectives of the company, the 
means of attaining the objectives and 
systems of monitoring performance are 
also set. For detailed information regarding 
corporate governance practices, please 
refer to Addendum-III of the company’s 
Annual Report.
	
As stipulated in the Guidelines on 
Corporate Governance for CPSE issued 
by Department of Public Enterprises vide 
OM 18(8)/2005-GM dated 14.05.2010 
and relevant SEBI (LODR) Regulations 
2015, a certificate on Compliance of 
Corporate Governance Guidelines has 
been obtained from a peer reviewed 
practising Company Secretary for the 
financial year 2025-26 and the same is 
enclosed as Addendum-V to the report.
1.6	
Disclosures with respect to Demat 
suspense 
account/ 
unclaimed 
suspense account 
	
No Shares are lying in the Demat 
suspense account/ unclaimed suspense 
account of CMPDIL.
1.7	
Disclosure 
of 
certain 
types 
of 
agreements binding listed entities
	
NA



	
59
	
His executive education includes an 
International Executive Diploma in Project 
Management from the School of Business, 
George Washington University, USA; 
Project Appraisal & Risk Management 
Certification 
from 
Duke 
Center 
for 
International 
Development, 
Duke 
University, USA; Advance Management 
Certificate in Sustainability from ESCP, 
Paris, France; Advance Management 
Certificate in Industry 4.0 from Maribor 
University, 
Slovenia 
and 
Project 
& 
Infrastructure Financing Certificate from 
IIM Bangalore.
	
The appointment of Shri Singh is poised 
to 
strengthen 
CMPDIL's 
strategic 
initiatives in mine planning, design and 
technological advancements, benefiting 
the entire coal industry.
	
	
Shri Mukesh Agrawal 
(DIN: 
10199741) 
Shri Mukesh Agrawal 
assumed charge of Part 
time Official Director on 
the Board of CMPDIL 
w.e.f 17th October 2024 
bringing with him an illustrious career 
spanning over three decades in the 
realms of corporate finance, strategic 
planning 
and 
financial 
governance. 
A seasoned finance professional, a 
fellow member of the Institute of Cost 
Accountants of India and a graduate in 
Science from the University of Allahabad, 
Shri Mukesh Agrawal combines analytical 
rigour with deep functional expertise 
in his core domain. His qualifications 
have enabled him to lead and transform 
financial functions across sectors such 
as telecommunications, infrastructure, 
mining and power generation.
	
He is currently serving as Director 
(Finance) at Coal India Limited. Prior 
1.8	
Brief Profile of the Leadership Team: 
	
Shri 
Chaudhari 
Shivraj 
Singh 
(DIN 
11416124) 
assumes 
charge as Chairman-
cum-Managing Director 
(CMD) 
of 
Central 
Mine 
Planning 
& 
Design Institute Limited (CMPDIL) on 
02.01.2026, Prior to this, Shri Singh has 
worked as OSD to CMD, CMPDIL and 
in other various capacities in Coal India 
Limited (CIL) and Northern Coalfields 
Limited (NCL). A distinguished mining 
professional with 35 years of exemplary 
service in the coal sector. Shri Singh 
brings extensive expertise in project 
management, opencast mine planning 
and operations, organizational business 
plans and enterprise risk management.
	
Shri Singh holds a B.Tech. degree in 
Mining Engineering from IIT (BHU), 
Varanasi in 1990 and began his career 
with NCL in the same year. Shri Singh 
has 17 years of experience in the 
Coalfields and 18 years of experience 
in Corporate planning, including roles in 
mega opencast mines and the Corporate 
Planning Department of NCL. At CIL, he 
served as Chief Risk Officer and Head of 
Corporate Planning Division. His notable 
achievements 
include 
spearheading 
the Master Plan for Singrauli Coalfield, 
establishing planning-execution linkages 
that propelled NCL beyond 100 MTPA 
coal production and delivering CIL Vision 
2047 and Long Term Plan 2035.
	
He has gained global exposure through 
visits 
to 
USA, 
France, 
Germany, 
Switzerland, 
Austria, 
Slovenia 
for 
executive 
education 
and 
Advance 
management exposure, Uzbekistan and 
Australia for executive education and 
business development.


60
to his appointment at CIL, he held the 
position of Executive Director (Finance) 
at NLC India Limited (NLCIL), a Navratna 
enterprise under the Ministry of Coal, prior 
to his appointment at CIL.
	
In this capacity, he was instrumental 
in fortifying the financial architecture 
of 
the 
organisation, 
spearheading 
initiatives in financial consolidation, digital 
transformation and policy optimisation. He 
also held the position of Chief Financial 
Officer at Neyveli Uttar Pradesh Power 
Ltd (NUPPL)—a coal-based supercritical 
thermal power joint venture—where he 
oversaw critical financial operations and 
project finance matters with precision and 
strategic foresight.
	
Shri Mukesh Agrawal’s core competencies 
include a broad spectrum of financial 
domains—corporate 
accounting, 
cost 
control, treasury and fund management, 
taxation, 
budgeting 
and 
forecasting, 
statutory 
compliance, 
digitisation 
of 
financial operations and enterprise risk 
management. He has led enterprise-
wide ERP integrations and has played 
a pivotal role in driving the shift towards 
tech-enabled financial transparency and 
real-time reporting.
	
A respected thought leader in public 
sector finance, Shri Mukesh Agrawal is 
known for his ability to blend operational 
detail with macro-level policy thinking. 
Apart from Project management and 
financing, he has been instrumental in 
shaping plans, formulating pricing and 
regulatory frameworks and optimising 
financial resources in line with national 
energy and infrastructure goals.
	
Beyond his role at Coal India Limited and 
Central Mine Planning & Design Institute 
(CMPDI), He holds directorships in several 
of CIL’s key subsidiaries and joint ventures 
including 
Eastern 
Coalfields 
Limited 
(ECL), and Coal Lignite Urja Vikas Private 
Limited. His board-level engagements 
reflect his nuanced understanding of the 
coal and power sectors.
	
With a rare blend of operational depth 
and strategic perspective, Shri Mukesh 
Agrawal continues to play a pivotal role in 
strengthening CMPDIL’s financial edifice 
and enhancing its global reputation
	
Shri 
Marapally 
Venkateshwarlu 
(DIN 
10059799) is a Director 
(Technical), Ministry of 
Coal. Prior to his posting 
as Director (Technical), 
Ministry of Coal, he 
was working in various capacities at 
Singareni Collieries Company Limited 
(SCCL). He did his B. Tech in Mining from 
Kothagudem School of Mines, Osmania 
University in the year 1996 and obtained 
First Class Mine Managers Competency 
Certificate from DGMS in the year 2000. 
He has also done Master of Business 
Administration 
and 
PG 
Diploma 
in 
Environmental Studies. He has worked 
at Singareni Collieries for more than 25 
years in different areas of coal mining 
including exploration, mine planning, 
mechanised underground and opencast 
mines, 
Research 
& 
Development, 
strategic planning and marketing. He was 
appointed as Official Part-Time Director on 
the Board of CMPDIL w.e.f. 01.01.2025.
	
Shri Ajay Kumar (DIN 
09774347) 
assumed 
charge 
as 
Director 
(Technical) at CMPDIL 
w.e.f 26.10.2022. Prior 
to this, he has served



	
61
in various capacities at NTPC Limited, 
CMPDIL Regional Institute-V, Bilaspur, 
CMPDIL and CCL.
	
Shri 
Ajay 
Kumar 
obtained 
Mining 
Engineering Degree in 1989 from IIT 
(ISM) -Dhanbad and in the same year, 
Shri Kumar started his career from 
N.K. Area of Central Coalfields Limited. 
Shri Kumar obtained First Class Mine 
Manager's Certificate of Competency in 
the year 1993.
	
Shri Kumar visited Indonesia, Australia, 
Uzbekistan, South Africa in official capacity 
and acquired Knowledge on working 
Methods of Coal Mines and Underground 
Coal Gasification in these countries.
	
Shri Kumar has also participated in GMI 
Conference held at USA & Switzerland.
	
Shri Kumar has vast experience and 
expertise in Open Cast Mine Planning 
and Mine Development which will benefit 
CMPDIL as well as entire Coal Mining 
Industry.
	
Shri 
Rajeev 
Kumar 
Sinha (DIN 11363113) 
assumed 
charge 
as 
Director 
(Technical), 
CMPDIL on 31.10.2025. 
Prior to this, he held 
several key positions in 
BCCL, CCL, and CMPDIL, demonstrating 
exemplary 
leadership, 
technical 
expertise, and a consistent commitment 
to operational excellence and sustainable 
mining.
	
Shri 
Sinha 
graduated 
in 
Mining 
Engineering from the prestigious Indian 
Institute of Technology (Indian School 
of Mines), Dhanbad in 1990. Shri Sinha 
started his illustrious career with Bharat 
Coking Coal Limited (BCCL) in the 
Kusunda Area, where he gained valuable 
hands-on experience across various 
aspects of coal mining operations. Driven 
by a passion for sustainable mining and 
environmental stewardship, he pursued 
M.Tech. in Environmental Science and 
Engineering from the same institute in 
1995, further strengthening his technical 
foundation and expanding his expertise 
in environmentally responsible mining 
practices. Shri Sinha obtained First 
Class Mine Manager's Certificate of 
Competency in the year 1998.
	
With over 34 years of rich experience in 
coal mining sector, Shri Sinha has made 
significant contributions to mine planning, 
environmental 
management, 
project 
development, and corporate strategy 
within Coal India Limited.
	
Shri Sinha’s vast experience and expertise, 
technical excellence, visionary leadership, 
and an unwavering commitment to 
sustainable and responsible mining will 
benefit CMPDIL as well as the coal mining 
sector of the country
	
Shri Nripendra Nath 
(DIN 
11363109) 
assumed 
charge 
as 
Director 
(Techincal), 
CMPDIL on 31.10.2025. 
Shri Nath graduated 
from IIT (ISM), Dhanbad 
in 1988. He began his career with CCL's 
N. K. Area and contributed significantly 
to the World Bank-aided KDH Project for 
nearly two decades.
	
He has held important positions including 
Project Officer in various mines of ECL. 
As Area General Manager of Magadh-
Sanghmitra Area of CCL he also played a 
pivotal role in propelling the Area into the 
prestigious 20 Mty production club.
	
Shri Nath is a SIMTARS-accredited 
trainer, trained in Australia, he has been 
deeply involved in imparting training in 
mine safety across CIL subsidiaries.


62
His 
efforts 
were 
instrumental 
in 
formulating 
and 
implementing 
Mine 
Safety Management Plans. He also has 
significant international exposure, having 
been part of the AGTMP delegation to 
several European countries in 2024.
	
His vast experience in various domains 
of Coal Industry will benefit CMPDIL and 
CIL to leverage global best practices for 
the advancement of mines safety and 
operations in India.
	
Shri 
Anand 
Mohan 
(DIN 
11710864) 
is 
a 
distinguished 
mining 
professional 
with over 36 years of 
rich 
and 
diversified 
experience 
in 
the 
coal mining sector, spanning multiple 
subsidiaries of Coal India Limited (CIL). 
His 
extensive 
career 
encompasses 
expertise in mine planning, operations, 
project 
management, 
rehabilitation, 
environmental management, and digital 
transformation initiatives.
	
He has served approximately 19 years 
with Northern Coalfields Limited (NCL), 
around 9 years with Central Coalfields 
Limited (CCL), and approximately 4 years 
with Eastern Coalfields Limited (ECL), 
in addition to significant tenures across 
other 
CIL 
subsidiaries, 
consistently 
holding leadership and operational roles 
of increasing responsibility.
	
Shri Anand Mohan holds an M. Tech in 
Open Cast Mining from the Indian School 
of Mines, Dhanbad, and a B. Tech in 
Mining Engineering from the Karnataka 
Regional Engineering College, Surathkal. 
He is also a holder of the First-Class Mines 
Manager's Certificate of Competency 
(DGMS), a testament to his technical 
proficiency and statutory expertise.
	
His 
professional 
standing 
is 
further 
distinguished by the following memberships:
•	
Fellow, The Institution of Engineers 
(India)
•	
Life 
Member, 
Mining 
Engineers 
Association of India (MMEAI)
•	
Life Member, Mining, Geological and 
Metallurgical Institute of India (MGMI)
	
Shri Anand Mohan has enriched his 
professional acumen through prestigious 
international 
training 
programmes, 
including:
•	
Environmental 
Assessment 
and 
Management- University of Wales, United 
Kingdom, under the British Council
•	
Environmental Management — Coal 
Research 
Establishment, 
United 
Kingdom, 
under 
the 
Overseas 
Development 
Administration, 
encompassing 
an 
intensive 
10-
week international programme on 
environmental management practices
	
In 
recognition 
of 
his 
outstanding 
performance and exemplary leadership, 
he has been conferred several prestigious 
honours, including the Coal Minister's 
Award and the Best Area GM / Individual 
Excellence Award.
	
Shri Anand Mohan has made notable 
contributions to mining literature through 
four significant publications in the year 
2005, namely Shock Tube Initiation 
System, Blasting Efficiency Improvement 
Using Shock Tube Initiation System, 
Monitoring and Instrumentation for Mine 
Slopes, and Misfire Management in 
Surface Mines.
	
Shri 
Pankaj 
Kumar, 
a 2007 batch officer of 
Indian Railways Traffic 
Service, assumed charge 
of the Chief Vigilance 
Officer (CVO) at CMPDIL 
on 13th December 2024.



	
63
He is also holding charge of CVO, CCL, 
Ranchi since 14th December 2022 and 
additional charge of CVO, NCL, Singaruli. 
Prior to this, Mr Kumar has served as the 
Senior 
Divisional 
Operation 
Manager, 
Dhanbad Division, East Central Railway 
from 2019 to 2022.
	
Shri Kumar is a graduate from Patna 
University and has also obtained a Master 
degree in Arts from Patna University. He 
has undergone training on High Speed 
Transport in China. Mr Kumar has worked in 
various capacities at the Division and Zonal 
Railway Units of Indian Railways. He served 
as Assistant Operation Manager, Danapur, 
Divisional Traffic Manager, Brakakana, Dy. 
Chief Operations Manager/ Coaching, ECR 
HQ, Hajipur, Dy. Chief Operations Manager/ 
Freight, ECR HQ, Hajipur, Senior Divisional 
Commercial Manager, Danapur, Senior 
Divisional Operations Manager, Danapur, 
Senior 
Divisional 
Operation 
Manager, 
Dhanbad Division.
	
Shri 
Rajesh 
Davera 
(DIN- 
11828075) 
is 
a 
distinguished 
tax 
consultant, 
financial 
management professional 
and corporate advisor 
with nearly four decades 
of extensive experience in taxation, 
finance, corporate advisory, internal audit 
and business administration. He has been 
appointed as Non-Official Independent 
Director on the Board of Central Mine 
Planning & Design Institute Limited 
(CMPDIL) with effect from 15.07.2026.
	
He holds a Bachelor of Commerce 
(B.Com.) and Master of Commerce 
(M.Com.) from the University of Rajasthan. 
He 
has 
also 
completed 
Chartered 
Accountancy (Intermediate and Final 
Group-II) and earned an MBA in Financial 
Management from The Global Open 
University, combining strong financial 
expertise with sound managerial acumen.
	
Since 1988, Shri Davera has been 
the Sole Proprietor of Rajesh Davera 
& 
Company, 
providing 
professional 
consultancy in Income Tax, VAT, GST, 
banking and financial advisory services. 
Over the years, he has advised numerous 
business establishments on taxation, 
financial planning, regulatory compliance 
and business management.
	
Between 2013 and 2018, he served as 
Chief Executive Officer (CEO) and Chief 
Financial Officer (CFO) of Chandraudai 
Automobiles 
Private 
Limited, Toyota 
Dealership for the Jodhpur and Bikaner 
regions, where he provided strategic 
leadership in corporate planning, financial 
management, 
operational 
excellence, 
business growth and governance. He also 
served as Internal Auditor of P.G. Foils 
Limited during 2014–2015, contributing 
to strengthening financial controls, audit 
systems and compliance frameworks.
	
His core areas of expertise include 
Finance, Taxation, Financial Management, 
Corporate Governance, Internal Audit, 
Administration, Strategic Planning and 
Business Advisory.
	
With his extensive professional experience, 
sound 
financial 
acumen, 
leadership 
capabilities and commitment to good 
governance, Shri Rajesh Davera brings 
valuable expertise in policy formulation, 
financial oversight and strategic decision-
making, 
enabling 
him 
to 
contribute 
effectively to the Board of CMPDIL and 
other public sector enterprises.
	
Shri Anand Shekhar 
Singh (DIN: 02327730) 
is 
an 
accomplished 
entrepreneur, 
educa-
tionist, industrialist and 
social contributor with 
more than two decades


64
of distinguished experience in education, 
pharmaceutical manufacturing, admin-
istration and corporate governance. He 
has been appointed as Non-Official Inde-
pendent Director on the Board of Central 
Mine Planning & Design Institute Limited 
(CMPDIL) on 15.07.2026.
	
He obtained his M.Tech. in Mechanical 
Engineering from Moscow State Mining 
University, Moscow, Russia (1994) and 
MBA (Marketing) from the Russian 
Academy of Economics, Moscow, Russia 
(1995), combining technical excellence 
with strong managerial capabilities.
	
As Chairman of the Babu Sunder Singh 
Education and Research Foundation, he 
has led initiatives in higher education, skill 
development, healthcare, social welfare 
and employment generation, establishing 
and managing engineering, pharmacy, 
degree, diploma and skill development 
institutions.
	
Since 2013, as Director of S K Meditech 
Private 
Limited, 
he 
has 
provided 
strategic leadership in pharmaceutical 
manufacturing and exports. His core 
expertise 
includes 
management, 
administration, 
technical 
operations, 
corporate governance, research, sales 
and marketing.
	
With his blend of technical knowledge, 
entrepreneurial 
vision, 
institutional 
leadership and commitment to public 
service, Shri Anand Shekhar Singh brings 
valuable 
experience 
in 
governance, 
policy formulation and strategic decision-
making, enabling him to contribute 
effectively to the Board of CMPDIL and 
other public sector enterprises.
	
Shri 
Satish 
Jha 
(DIN: 10299809), has 
assumed 
the 
charge 
of 
Chairman-cum-
Managing 
Director 
(Additional 
Charge), 
CMPDIL w.e.f. 01.11.2025 to 02.01.2026 
and he was also  serving as Chairman-
cum-Managing 
Director, 
ECL 
w.e.f 
19.12.2024. Prior to this he was working 
as 
Director 
(Technical/Engineering 
Services), 
CMPDIL 
and 
was 
also 
holding the Additional Charge of Director 
(Technical) P&P, CCL till 14.12.2024.
	
Shri Jha is a highly accomplished mining 
professional with over three decades 
of experience in large mechanized 
underground 
and 
opencast 
mining 
operations. He holds a B.E. (Mining) from 
Nagpur University, M. Tech in Industrial 
Engineering & Management from ISM 
Dhanbad and a Certified Project Manager 
credential from I2P2M, and is currently 
pursuing Ph.D. in Mine Planning from 
IIT BHU. His qualifications also include 
a First-Class Mine Manager's Certificate 
of Competency (DGMS) and rescue 
training from MRS, Dhanbad. Shri Jha's 
international exposure includes training in 
Clean Coal Technology in Japan (2004), 
presenting a paper on "Sustainable 
Development 
of 
Singrauli 
Coalfields 
vis-Ã -vis Mining Equipment Selection, 
Environment and Ecology Management" 
at Curtin University, Perth, Australia 
(2019) and as a speaker at the African 
Mining Indaba in South Africa (2024) on 
balancing energy security through coal.
	
Shri Jha has held leadership roles across 
CMPDIL, CCL, NCL, and SECL.  At 
CMPDIL, he pioneered initiatives such 
as Enabling the use of PM Gatishakti 
portal in Coal Sector to “National 
Master Plan, Enabled 5G Roll out and 
Use cases for Coal Industry -7th Indian 
Mobile Congress, Organized Hackathon 
(2023) on "R&D in Coal Sector". He also 
assisted in developing the administrative 
dashboard and upgradation of CMSMS



	
65
portal and "Khanan Prahari" App. Apart 
from this he also introduced the system 
of "Quality" Audit of FMC Projects of 
different Subsidiaries. He also undertook 
Sand replenishment studies in the State of 
Rajasthan and aggressively led CMPDIL 
to undertake PMC for Solar Projects 
across CIL Subsidiaries. 
	
At CCL, as Director (Technical/P&P), he 
secured Stage II Forest Clearance for 
the Kotre Basantpur (5 MTY) project and 
Karo OC, Kedla OC, Rajrappa OC and 
Stage I clearance for Magadh (20 MTY) 
and Chandragupta (15 MTY) projects. 
He was instrumental in obtaining EC for 
Chandragupta OC Mine. He also obtained 
EC for 4 Projects (addition of 21.75 MTY) 
along with finalizing the MDO tender for 
Sanghamitra (20 MTY). 
	
At NCL, he led projects like successful 
rehabilitation of Nigahi Village in 2008 to 
2010, planned and implemented barrier 
coal extraction between Nigahi and 
Amlohri mine, the first in CIL and was 
awarded by NCL Management for the 
same. He was Instrumental in executing 
MOU with IIT BHU and establishing 
Innovation cum incubation centre at IIT 
BHU. He was associated with Digital 
Transformation through 17 use cases 
in 4 NCL Projects as Nodal Officer. He 
was instrumental in physical possession 
of 36 Ha of land after a gap of 23 years 
which was a major hindrance to the 
development of the Dudhichua Project 
exhibiting his community outreach skills. 
Shri Jha also introduced integrated "In-Pit 
Mobile Crusher-cum-Conveying System" 
at Dudhichua. At NCL Amlohri Project, 
he enabled achievement of AAP target 
in 2021-22 and 2022-23 after a gap of 
three years through strategic planning 
introduced Rapid Loading System (RLS 
4MTY capacity) at Amlohri Siding and was 
instrumental in Business Diversification- 
Under "Waste to Wealth" mission - 
installation and commissioning of "OB to 
m-Sand plant". Under his leadership as 
GM (Corporate Planning), NCL became 
a member of the elite "100Mty Club" with 
consistent 7% CAGR. 
	
In SECL, Shri Jha successfully introduced 
Longwall mining at Kumda, Bishrampur 
Area, and earned the prestigious "SECL 
Samman" in 2003 for managing complex 
geological conditions safely. 
	
Shri Jha's accolades include the "Best 
General Manager/HoD" award on Coal 
India Foundation Day (2019) and numerous 
recognitions for his community outreach 
efforts. With a track record of innovation, 
operational excellence, and sustainable 
practices, Shri Satish Jha continues to 
be a transformative leader in India's coal 
mining sector.
	
Shri 
Manoj 
Kumar 
(DIN: 
09225497), 
graduated in Mining 
Engineering from IIT-
BHU, Varanasi in 1986 
and also obtained First 
Class Mine Managers 
Certificate of competency in the year 
1990. He started his career in the coal 
industry from Korba Area of South 
Eastern Coalfields Limited (SECL) in the 
year 1986 and has vast experience in field 
level working of both UG and OC mines.
	
He joined CMPDIL in 1998 and has 
worked in UG and OC mine planning 
and played a lead role in planning of 
India's biggest coal mines like Gevra, 
Kusumunda and Dipka Mines. He also 
has an administrative experience of 9 
years as Regional Director of three RIs of


66
CMPDIL, where he facilitated in making of 
future roadmap for NCL, SECL and CCL.
	
He was also HoD of CBM/CMM Clearing 
house of CMPDIL and got the first two 
Project Reports of CIL's CBM Blocks 
approved during his tenure. He was 
awarded as the best General Manager at 
Coal India Level in the year 2019.
	
He 
visited 
Poland, 
Australia 
and 
Kazakhstan in official capacity and has 
exposure of global mining practices.
	
He has been appointed as Chairman-
cum-Managing Director on the Board of 
CMPDIL w.e.f. 04.10.2021 to 31.10.2025.
	
Shri 
Shankar 
Nagachari 
(DIN 
09729657) 
holds 
a 
Mining 
Engineering 
Degree 
(1988) 
from 
The 
Institution 
of 
Engineers (India), an 
MBA in Marketing Management from 
IGNOU, and an Executive MBA from IIM 
Ranchi. He began his professional journey 
at Ambara Colliery, Kanhan Area of Western 
Coalfields Limited (WCL), and has held key 
leadership roles in both underground and 
opencast mining operations. Rising through 
the ranks from Mine Manager to Area 
General Manager, he has made significant 
contributions to coal production across 
Western Coalfields Limited (WCL) and 
South Eastern Coalfields Limited (SECL).
	
Under his dynamic leadership, the 
Baikunthpur and Sohagpur Areas of 
SECL received National Safety Awards, 
underscoring his unwavering commitment 
to operational excellence and safety 
standards.
	
In addition to his role as Director 
(Technical/CRD) at CMPDIL he also held 
additional charge as Director (Technical – 
Project & Planning) at Bharat Coking Coal 
Limited (BCCL) and additional charge as 
Director (Technical) at Central Coalfields 
Limited (CCL). He was also serving on 
the Board of Coal India Africana Limitada 
(CIAL), a wholly-owned subsidiary of Coal 
India Limited (CIL), set up to develop coal 
projects in Mozambique.
	
He is a Life Member of the All India 
Management Association (AIMA) and 
the Mining, Geological & Metallurgical 
Institute of India (MGMI), and a Life 
Fellow Member of The Institution of 
Engineers (India). 
	
With his vast technical knowledge, 
leadership acumen, and international 
exposure, Shri Shankar Nagachari is 
well-positioned to contribute meaningfully 
to the strategic growth and development 
of CMPDIL and the broader coal industry 
ecosystem.
	
He was appointed as Director (Technical) 
on the Board of CMPDIL from 02.09.2022 
to 28.02.2026
1.9	
Disclosures
•	
Materially Significant related party 
transactions:
	
The Company has not entered into 
any materially significant related party 
transactions with the Directors or the 
Senior Management Personnel or their 
relatives for the year ended 31st March, 
2026 that may have potential conflict of 
interest of the company at the large.
	
No agenda was placed before the 
Board meetings held during the year 
2025-26 in respect of any contract or 
arrangement with a related party.
	
As per related party transactions 
policy, any transactions between 
two Government Companies and 
transactions 
between 
holding 
Company and Subsidiary Company 
are exempted.



	
67
	
Contracts 
or 
Arrangements 
with 
related parties’ U/s 188 (1) is enclosed 
as Addendum-VI.
•	
Details of compliance of Laws by 
the Company 
	
The Company is monitoring the 
compliance of various laws applicable 
to the Company and there is no 
adverse report for non-compliance 
by the Company, penalty, strictures 
imposed on the Company by any 
authority on any matter related to any 
guidelines issued by Government 
during the last three financial years is 
brought to the notice of the Company.
•	
Access to the Audit Committee as 
per the Whistle Blower Policy:
	
This policy is formulated to provide 
an opportunity to employees to 
report to the management instances 
of unethical behavior, actual or 
suspected, fraud or violation of the 
company’s code of conduct and to the 
Audit Committee.
	
No personnel have been denied 
access to the Audit Committee as 
per the Whistle Blower policy and no 
cases was reported under Whistle 
Blower policy during the year.
•	
Compliance of the guidelines on 
Corporate Governance:
	
The requirements of these guidelines 
with respect of Board of Directors, Audit 
Committee, Disclosures, Reports and 
Code of Conduct etc. are complied 
with. However, the Guidelines like 
Subsidiary 
Companies, 
Training 
Policy etc. are uniformly considered 
by CIL for all its subsidiaries which are 
followed by CMPDIL also. A certificate 
from the Company Secretary, who 
is in whole-time practice with regard 
to 
compliance 
of 
conditions 
of 
Corporate Governance is annexed 
to this report as Addendum- V. The 
Company has made communications 
with the Ministry of Coal, who is the 
appointing authority, for appointment 
of the required number of Independent 
Directors to comply with the provisions 
of the Companies Act, 2013 and DPE 
Guidelines.
•	
Integrity Pact & IEM
	
The Company has a Memorandum 
of 
Understanding 
(MoU) 
with 
Transparency 
International 
India 
(TII) for implementing an integrity 
Pact 
Programme 
focused 
on 
enhancing 
transparency 
in 
its 
business transactions, contracts and 
procurement 
process. 
Under 
the 
MoU, the Company is committed to 
implement the integrity Pact in all its 
major procurement and work contract 
activities. Two Independent External 
Monitors, being persons of eminence 
nominated by TII in consultation with 
the Central Vigilance Commission 
(CVC), monitor the activities. The 
Integrity Pact has strengthened the 
established systems and procedures 
by creating trust and has the full 
support of the CVC.
•	
CEO/CFO Certification:
	
The Chairman-cum-Managing Director 
/CEO and the General Manager 
(Finance)/CFO of the Company have 
furnished the “CEO/CFO Certification” 
for the Financial Year 2025-26 to the 
Board of Directors of the Company 
which is placed as Addendum-II to 
Directors’ Report.
•	
Code of Conduct for Directors and 
Senior Executives:
	
The Code of Conduct for the Directors 
and Senior Management Personnel of 
the company has been laid down by 
the Board, which has been circulated 
to all the concerned and the same is


68
also hosted on Intranet portal. The 
Directors and Senior Management 
personnel of the Company affirmed 
compliance with the provisions of the 
Company’s Code of Conduct for the 
financial year ended 31st March, 2026.
•	
Details of Expenses incurred:
	
No items of expenditure debited in the 
books of accounts, which are not for 
the purpose of the Business and no 
expenses debited which are personal 
in nature and incurred for the Board 
of Directors and top management, 
and the company’s Auditor had not 
reported any such occurrences.
•	
Presidential Directives:
	
No Presidential Directives was issued 
by the Central Government to CMPDIL 
during the financial year 2025-26.
1.10	
Audit Qualification
	
It is always the Company’s endeavour to 
present unqualified financial statement.
Comments of the Comptroller & Auditor 
General of India under Companies Act, 
2013 on the Accounts of the Company, 
for the Financial Year ended 31st March, 
2026 is enclosed at Addendum-VII.
1.11 	 Training of Board Members
	
The Board of Directors were fully 
briefed on all business related matters, 
associated risks future strategies etc. of 
the company. 
	
The Functional Directors are the head of 
the respective functional areas by virtue 
of their possessing the requisite expertise 
and experience. They are aware of the 
business model of the company as well as 
the risk profile of the company’s business. 
The part-time Directors are also fully 
aware of the company’s business model.
	
The Independent Directors are sponsored 
for training on Corporate Governance from 
time to time. All the official Directors are 
sponsored for training both in India and 
abroad. All the newly appointed Directors 
of the company are familiarized with the 
various aspects of the company like the 
constitution, Vision & Mission statement, 
core 
activities, 
Board 
procedures, 
Strategic directions etc. by way of detailed 
presentation, discussion etc.
1.12	
Whistle Blower Policy: 
	
In order to strengthen the ethical 
behaviours of the employees of the 
company and promote the interest of 
different stake holders, the whistle blower 
policy of CMPDIL was introduced during 
the year 2011-12 and Board was informed 
in its 163rd meeting held on 08.11.2011. 
This policy is formulated to provide an 
opportunity to employees to report to 
the management instances of unethical 
behavior, actual or suspected, fraud 
or violation of the company’s code of 
conduct. 
	
The Company's Whistle Blower Policy is in 
compliance with the provisions of Section 
177(9) and 177(10) of the Companies Act, 
2013, read with the applicable rules made 
thereunder, and Regulation 22 of the 
SEBI (Listing Obligations and Disclosure 
Requirements) Regulations, 2015. It 
is to provide necessary safeguards for 
protection of employees from reprisals or 
victimization.
	
However, a disciplinary action against the 
Whistle Blower which occurs on account 
of poor job performance or misconduct 
by the Whistle Blower and which is 
independent of any disclosure made by 
the Whistle Blower shall not be protected 
under this policy.



	
69
1.13	 Code of Internal procedures and 
conduct for prevention of Insider 
Trading
In pursuance to Regulation 9(1) of 
SEBI (Prohibition of Insider Trading) 
Regulations 2015, CMPDIL had adopted 
Code of Internal Procedures and Conduct 
for Prevention of Insider Trading in 
Securities of CMPDIL with the objective of 
preventing purchase and/or sale of shares 
of Company by an insider on the basis of 
unpublished price sensitive information. As 
required under the regulations, Company 
is 
maintaining 
a 
Structured 
Digital 
Database [SDD] internally of Designated 
persons and their relatives.
1.14	
Accountability of Directors
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) 
between the management of CMPDIL 
and CIL / MoC, Govt. of India is signed 
before commencement of the ensuing 
financial year as laid down in the DPE 
Guidelines. Under this agreement, the 
company undertakes to achieve the target 
set in at the beginning of the year and it 
is intended to evaluate the performance 
of CMPDIL at the end of the year against 
the target fixed. It is done by adopting a 
system of “Five point scale” and “criteria 
weight” which result in calculation of 
“composite score”. The composite score 
is forwarded to DPE through CIL and the 
Administrative Ministry (MoC) for their 
ratification.
The MoU system enables to perform efficiently 
as there are a variety of parameters both 
financial and non-financial (Dynamic, Sectors 
specific and Enterprise specific parameters). 
This process helps immensely in fulfillment 
of the long ranging objectives and overall 
growth. The entire process also ensures 
transparency and accountability towards 
stakeholders.
 1.15	
Quarterly 
Reporting 
System 
on 
	
Compliance of Corporate Governance
	
A quarterly reporting system has been 
developed by Ministry to be reported by the 
CPSEs to their respective Administrative 
Ministries. In compliance of this, CMPDIL 
has been submitting its Quarterly report 
regularly and timely to MoC.
1.16	
Key Managerial Personnel
As per the provisions of section 203 of the 
Companies Act 2013, the Key Managerial 
Personnel as on 31st March, 2026 are:
Shri Chaudhari Shivraj Singh	:	 CEO
Shri Ajay Kumar	
:	 Director
Shri Rajeev Kumar Sinha	
:	 Director
Shri Nripendra Nath	
:	 Director
Shri Sudip Dasgupta	
:	 CFO
Shri Abhishek Mundhra	
:	 Company 
	
	
Secretary
1.17	
CSR initiative at CMPDIL
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) 
and 
Sustainability 
is 
a 
company’s 
commitment to its stakeholders to conduct 
business in an economically, socially and 
environmentally sustainable manner that 
is transparent and ethical. The thrust of 
CSR and Sustainability is on capacity 
building, empowerment of communities, 
inclusive 
socio-economic 
growth, 
environment protection, promotion of 
green and energy efficient technologies, 
development of backward regions, and 
upliftment of the marginalized and under-
privileged sections of the society.The 
company has formulated its own CSR 
policy as per notification issued by Ministry 
of Corporate Affairs, Govt. of India as well 
as DPEs guidelines and section 135 of 
Companies Act, 2013 and the rules made 
there under.
CSR & Sustainability, brings not only 
risks for the Mining industry, but also


70
creates a set of opportunities. CSR & 
Sustainability can help companies secure 
their social license to operate, contribute 
in a meaningful way to sustainable 
development. 
CMPDIL 
reiterates 
its 
commitment 
to 
social 
responsibility 
towards CSR & sustainability by integrating 
social and environmental concerns in 
day-to-day business operations. Two tier 
decision making committees have been 
constituted in CMPDIL to implement its 
policies and programs. 
Keeping in view the special nature of its 
business, CMPDIL initiated its CSR & 
Sustainability activities during 2025-26 
which may be found in ADDENDUM – VIII 
of the report.
1.18	
Annual Return
	
The Annual Return of the company is 
available on our Website Link https://
www.cmpdi.co.in/en/investor-relation/
financials-and-secretarial-matters 
1.19	
Conservation of Energy, Technology 
absorption, 
Foreign 
Exchange 
earnings and outgo.
The details regarding conservation of 
Energy, Technology absorption, Foreign 
Exchange earnings and outgo, is enclosed 
as 
Addendum 
to 
Directors’ 
Report 
(Addendum-I).
1.20	
Annual Evaluation of Board Committee 
and Directors Performance
The Ministry of Corporate Affairs (MCA), 
through its General Circular dated 5th 
June 2015, has exempted Government 
Companies from the applicability of 
Section178(2) of the Companies Act, 
2013, which requires the performance 
evaluation of every Director by the 
Nomination 
and 
Remuneration 
Committee.
The same circular also provides an 
exemption from the provisions of Section 
134(3)(p) of the Act, which mandates 
disclosure 
in 
the 
Directors’ 
Report 
regarding the formal evaluation of the 
Board, its Committees, and individual 
Directors. This exemption applies where 
such evaluations are carried out by the 
Ministry or Department of the Central 
Government responsible for administrative 
oversight of the Company, or, as applicable, 
by the concerned State Government 
as per its own evaluation methodology. 
Further, as per the MCA Notification 
dated 5th July 2017, where performance 
evaluation parameters are prescribed 
by the relevant Ministry or Department 
of the Central or State Government and 
duly complied with by the Government 
Company, the provisions of Schedule IV 
of the Companies Act 2013 relating to 
performance evaluation of Directors are 
also not applicable.
The Department of Public Enterprises 
(DPE) has established a framework for the 
performance appraisal of all Functional 
and Independent Directors of Government 
Companies. The performance of your 
Company is assessed by the DPE in 
relation to the targets and deliverables set 
out in the Memorandum of Understanding 
(MoU), which is executed on an annual 
basis, with Government of India outlining 
key performance parameters.
1.21	
Declaration given by independent 
directors under sub-section  (6) of 
section 149.
• 
CMPDIL 
does 
not 
have 
any 
Independent Director in its Board 
during the Financial Year 2025-26.
• 
However, two Independent Directors 
were appointed with effect from 15th 
July 2026. The Company confirms that 
it has received requisite declarations 
from all Independent Directors under:



	
71
• 
Section 149 (7) of Companies Act 2013 and 
• 
Resulation 25 (8) of SEBI LODR Regulation, 2015
1.22 	 Board of Director & Key Managerial Personnel
• 
Functional Directors
1.
Shri Chaudhari Shivraj Singh :
Chairman-cum-Managing Director (From 02.01.2026)
2.
Shri Satish Jha
:
Chairman-cum-Managing Director (From 01.11.2025 
to 02.01.2026)
3.
Shri Manoj Kumar
:
Chairman-cum-Managing Director (From 04.10.2021 
to 31.10.2025)
4.
Shri Ajay Kumar
:
Director (Technical) (From 26.10.2022)
5.
Shri Rajeev Kumar Sinha
:
Director (Technical) (From 31.10.2025)
6.
Shri Nripendra Nath
:
Director (Technical) (From 31.10.2025)
7.
Shri Shankar Nagachari
:
Director (Technical) (From 02.09.2022 to 28.02.2026)
• 
Official Part–time Directors
1.
Shri Mukesh Agrawal
:
Director (Finance), Coal India Limited (From 
17.10.2024)
2.
Shri Marapally Venkateshwarlu :
Director (T/NA) Ministry of Coal (From 01.01.2025)
•  Company Secretary
1.
Shri Abhishek Mundhra
:
Senior Manager (Finance) / Company Secretary and 
Compliance Officer (From 18.02.2016)
	• 	 Chief Financial Officer
1.
Shri Sudip Dasgupta
General Manager (Finance)/ CFO (From 01.10.2024)
1.23	
CMPDIL has established a structured Risk Management Framework to foster a robust risk 
management culture and support the achievement of its strategic and operational objectives. 
The Company has constituted a Risk Management Committee of the Board and adopted a Risk 
Management Policy, under which enterprise-level risks are periodically identified, assessed, 
monitored and mitigated.
	
The Enterprise Risk Register of the Company covers key risk categories, including Strategic 
Risk, Operational Risk, Financial Risk and Compliance Risk. Risk Owners and Risk Mitigation 
Plan Owners have been identified for significant risks to ensure effective monitoring, timely 
mitigation and periodic review.
 
Significant risks are identified and workshops has been conducted on an ongoing basis, 
and mitigation plans are reviewed periodically to address emerging risks and strengthen the 
Company's overall risk management processes.


72
1.24	
Significant and material orders passed by the regulators or courts etc.
	
As per the provisions of Section 134(3)(q) of the Companies Act, 2013, companies are required 
to disclose information regarding significant and material orders passed by regulators or courts 
in their Directors’ Report.
	
The litigation related to Kusum Kanti Kujur and CMPDI with respect to possession of land at 
RI-V, Bilaspur has been found relevant. The relevant orders of Supreme Court, DC, Bilaspur 
and Chhattisgarh High Court are hereby provided.
	
Kusum Kanti Kujur & Anr. vs. CMPDIL: The litigation pertains to land in Village Pachri, 
Bilaspur (Chhattisgarh), where a dispute arose regarding the respondents' possession over a 
portion of the land utilized by CMPDIL. The matter ultimately reached the Hon'ble Supreme 
Court in Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 7694 of 2025. By order dated 19.03.2025, the 
Hon'ble Supreme Court directed the Collector, Bilaspur to identify the exact area and extent 
of land under the respondents' possession after affording due opportunity to both parties and, 
thereafter, to hand over possession of the identified land to the respondents. Subsequently, 
on CMPDIL's Miscellaneous Application seeking modification, the Hon'ble Supreme Court, by 
order dated 01.09.2025, modified its earlier directions and confined the Collector's exercise to 
determination of the value of the land and the amount payable by CMPDIL to the respondents 
after issuing notice to the concerned parties. Pursuant thereto, the Collector initiated proceedings 
and determined the amount payable. Aggrieved by the valuation determined by the Collector, 
CMPDIL challenged the same before the Hon'ble High Court of Chhattisgarh by filing WPC No. 
3006 of 2026. By interim order dated 22.06.2026, the Hon'ble High Court directed CMPDIL to 
deposit ₹1 crore with the Collector, Bilaspur, to be kept in a safe custody/account, subject to 
the final outcome of the writ petition. The matter is presently pending adjudication before the 
Hon'ble High Court. 
1.25   Cost Record and Cost Audit
	
The Company has prepared and maintained cost records, as prescribed under Section 148(1) 
of the Companies Act, 2013 for the year 2025-26. The Cost Audit Report for the year 2024-25 
has been filed with the Ministry of Corporate Affairs within the due date in XBRL Format. The 
Cost Auditors for the year 2024-25 was M/s Vijender Sharma & Co. New Delhi.
	
The Cost Auditors appointed for the year 2025-26 is M/s Shome & Banerjee, Kolkata. The Cost 
Auditor shall, within a period of 180 days from the closure of the financial year, forward the 
Cost Audit Report and the Company is required to file the Cost Audit Report with the Ministry 
of Corporate Affairs within 30 days of receipt of the same.
1.24	
Confirmation by CMPDIL:-
1.	
None of the Directors are disqualified for appointment as per Section 164 of the Companies 
Act, 2013.
2.	
During the Financial Year 2025–26, the Company did not have any subsidiary, joint venture 
or associate company. Accordingly, no company became or ceased to be a subsidiary, 
joint venture or associate company of the Company during the year under review.



	
73
3.	
No Statutory, Secretarial and Cost Auditors had resigned during the year 2025-26.
4.	
No fraud has been reported by the Statutory Auditors in the Audit Report on the Financial 
Statements.
5.	
No relative of any Director was appointed to place of profit.
6.	
CMPDIL, being the Government company is exempt from the applicability of the provisions 
of Section 134 (3)(e) of the Companies Act 2013 relating to the disclosure of the policy 
on Directors' appointment and remuneration, in accordance with the Gazette Notification 
dated 5th June 2015 issued by Ministry of Corporate Affairs, Government of India.  
7.	
There is no deposit covered under Chapter V of Companies Act 2013.
8.	
There is no Deposit which is not under Compliance of Chapter V of Companies Act 2013.
9.	
No amount has been transferred to general reserve from profit of CMPDIL in FY 2025-26.
10.	 There is no change in the nature of Business.
11.	 Applicable Secretarial Standard have been duly followed by the Company.
12.	 There has been no application made or any proceeding pending under the Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy Code, 2016 as at the end of the Financial Year 2025-26.
13.	 The details of difference between amount of the valuation done at the time of one – 
time settlement and the valuation done whileby taking loan from the banks or financial 
institutions along with the reason there of – Not applicable in CMPDIL for the Financial 
Year 2025-26.
14.	 During the Financial Year 2025–26, the Company did not have any Independent Director 
on its Board. Accordingly, the requirement under Section 134(3)(q) of the Companies Act, 
2013 regarding disclosure of the opinion of the Board with regard to integrity, expertise, 
experience (including proficiency) of the Independent Directors appointed during the year 
is not applicable for the year under review.
15.	 The Company is fully compliant with the provisions of the Maternity Benefit Act, 1961, as 
amended by the Maternity Benefit (Amendment) Act 2017.


74
PART: B
ANNUAL PERFORMANCE OVERVIEW
1.0	
Geological Exploration & Drilling  
	
In FY 2025–26, CMPDIL carried out its 
coal exploration efforts across various 
segments, including CIL, Non-CIL, 
Promotional, NMEDT, and Captive 
Mining blocks. It also carried out lignite 
exploration in the states of Tamilnadu, 
Rajasthan and Jammu & Kashmir 
along with exploration for metals in 
one Magnetite block in Jharkhand and 
one Cu and associate mineral block in 
Madhya Pradesh.
	
Coal Exploration in CIL blocks aimed 
at assisting the project planning and 
production 
support 
requirements 
of CIL subsidiaries. In Non-CIL and 
Consultancy blocks, the objective was 
to support the auction and allocation 
process for coal blocks to interested 
stakeholders 
and 
developers. 
Additionally, Promotional and NMEDT-
funded exploration efforts confined to 
newly identified, previously unexplored 
areas, with the aim of subsequent 
detailed exploration and preparing 
these blocks for future auction or 
allotment.
	
Lignite explorations were carried out 
in the Detailed exploration category 
through Non-CIL funding under CSS 
scheme of MoC. While, Magnetite 
exploration in one block in Jharkhand 
and Exploration for Base Metal in 
one block in Madhya Pradesh were 
carried out through NMEDT funding of 
Ministry of Mines.
1.1	
Drilling Performance in 2025-26:
1.1.1	 Sector-wise Drilling Performance
	
The exploratory drilling program for 
FY 2025-26 was categorized into 
three primary mineral sectors: such as
	
Exploration in the Coal Sector: 
Coal 
exploration 
constituted 
the 
vast majority of the drilling program, 
covering 146 blocks across twelve 
states including 5 NER states. Detailed 
drilling in CIL blocks accounted for 
3.21 lakh meters in 57 blocks, with 
significant operations in the Raniganj, 
Sohagpur, Wardha Valley, Korba, and 
Pench Kannan Tawa Valley coalfields. 
Non-CIL detailed drilling reached 6.45 
lakh meters across 50 blocks, while 
Promotional (Regional) drilling for 
coal achieved 1.21 lakh meters in 32 
blocks. Additionally, coal drilling was 
carried out in 6 captive mining blocks 
(0.27 lakh meters) and NMEDT-
funded projects (0.005 lakh meters), 
primarily in the Pench Kannan Tawa 
Valley coalfield.
	
Exploration in the Lignite Sector: 
In 
FY 
2025-26, 
detailed 
lignite 
exploration under Non-CIL funding 
was concentrated across five blocks, 
achieving a total drilling meterage of 
36,150.50 meters. Rajasthan was 
the primary focus area, contributing 
35,814.00 meters from three blocks. 
The remaining exploration occurred 
in Jammu & Kashmir, with 310.50 
meters in one block, and Tamil Nadu, 
where 26.00 meters were drilled in a 
single block.
	
Exploration in the Non-Coal Sector: 
Under the diversification programme, 
CMPDIL carried out exploration for 
magnetite in the state of Jharkhand. 
This involved 54 meters of drilling in 
the Pipradih block. The project was 
executed utilizing NMEDT funding to 
expand mineral assessment beyond 
traditional coal and lignite resources. 
Exploration for Base Metal (Cu and 
associated minerals) was also taken 
up in Kochipur Block in Madhya 
Pradesh.



	
75
	
CMPDIL has acquired Exploration Licence in Nawatola Devigarh REE and RM block in the 
state of Rajasthan in first tranche for auction of Exploration Licence block by MoM.
	
Exploration planned to be taken up for REE in Ontilu-Chandragiri block, Telengana, REE 
Exploration licences block, where CMPDIL also acted as a transactional advisor for CIL in 
the acquisition of the block in the 1st tranche of auction, for REE & rare metals in Kawalapur 
block, Maharashtra & for Graphite in Kathalai Choti Block , Madhya Pradesh. Mining lease 
work will be taken up in Oranaga, Chhattisgarh for Graphite.
1.1.2	
Agency-wise Drilling Performance
	
During FY 2025–26, overall exploratory drilling performance reached 11.50 lakh meters, 
exceeding the annual target of 11.00 lakh meters by achieving 105% of the target. This 
represents a 14% growth compared to the previous year’s performance of 10.12 lakh 
meters.
	
Departmental drilling contributed 4.73 lakh meters, surpassing its annual target of 4.30 lakh 
meters and achieving 110% of the target, with a 2% growth over the previous year’s figure 
of 4.64 lakh meters.
	
Under the outsourcing sector, a total of 6.77 lakh meters was achieved against a target 
of 6.70 lakh meters, resulting in 101% target achievement and an overall 24% growth 
compared to last year.
Table 1.1.2 A : Agency type-wise Drilling undertaken by CMPDIL in F.Y. 2025-26
(Figures in Lakh meter)
Agency
Drilling During Apr’25 to Mar’26
Achieved 
Prev. Year: 
Apr’24  to 
Mar’25
Growth 
(%)
Annual 
Target 
2025-26
Achiev.
Achiev. (%)
I. Departmental
4.30
4.73
110%
4.64
2%
II. Outsourcing
St. Govts.
0.02
0.09
474%
0.02
308%
MECL
3.98
4.13
104%
3.59
15%
Tendering
2.70
2.55
94%
1.86
37%
Sub-Total Outsourcing:
6.70
6.77
101%
5.48
24%
Grand Total
11.00
11.50
105%
10.12
14%
	
Within outsourcing:
	
State Government agencies recorded the highest growth, achieving 0.09 lakh meters 
against a target of 0.02 lakh meters, corresponding to 474% target achievement and 308% 
growth over the previous year.
	
MECL achieved 4.13 lakh meters against a target of 3.98 lakh meters, attaining 104% 
target achievement and 15% growth over FY 2024–25.
	
Tendering agencies delivered 2.55 lakh meters against a target of 2.70 lakh meters, 
achieving 94% of the target and registering 37% growth compared to the previous year.


76
	
CMPDIL utilized its departmental 
resources to undertake exploration 
activities in 57 coal blocks, achieving 
a drilling total of 4.73 lakh meters.
	
Under an MoU arrangement, MECL, 
along with its associated agencies 
such as KEMSPL, MMPL, Geotech, 
and MAPL, carried out exploration in 
58 blocks, including 53 coal blocks 
and 5 lignite blocks, achieving a total 
of 4.13 lakh meters. Of this, coal 
drilling accounted for 3.77 lakh meters, 
executed by MECL across CIL, Non-
CIL, Promotional, and Consultancy 
blocks, while lignite drilling contributed 
0.36 lakh meters, primarily in Non-CIL 
blocks.
	
Through tendering mode, contractual 
agencies including MTCS, KEMSPL, 
MMPL, APC, and MAPL were engaged 
across 32 blocks. Their activities were 
primarily focused on coal exploration 
in both NER and Non-NER regions, 
resulting in 2.55 lakh meters of coal 
drilling and 54 meters in one non-coal 
block, bringing the total achievement 
to 2.55 lakh meters. Major contributors 
included MTCS with 0.92 lakh meters 
and KEMSPL with 0.74 lakh meters.
	
Additionally, 
State 
Government 
agencies—namely DGM Nagaland 
and 
DMG 
Sikkim—undertook 
exploration in 5 promotional coal 
blocks in the NER region, achieving a 
combined drilling performance of 0.09 
lakh meters.
	
Overall, across all executing agencies, 
exploratory drilling during FY 2025–26 
reached a grand total of 11.50 lakh 
meters across 152 blocks.
1.1.3	
Fund-wise Drilling Performance
	
The 
exploratory 
drilling 
program 
for the 2025-26 fiscal year was 
strategically distributed across various 
funding sources to ensure a balanced 
approach between coal, lignite, and 
non-coal resource assessment. Major 
source of funding in 2025-26 are CIL, 
Non-CIL, Promotional, NMEDT and 
Consultancy.
	
The detailed breakdown of drilling 
performance by funding source is as 
follows:
	
CIL Funding:
	
In 
FY 
2025–26, 
detailed 
coal 
exploration was conducted across 57 
CIL blocks, resulting in a total drilling 
achievement of 3.21 lakh meters. 
This achievement included production 
support exploration in 8 blocks and 
specialized gassiness studies in one 
block within the Jharia Coalfield in 
Jharkhand.
	
The exploration was concentrated 
in Madhya Pradesh (Sohagpur and 
Pench Kanhan Tawa Valley CFs), 
which 
contributed 
significantly 
to 
the total, followed by Maharashtra 
(Wardha Valley, Umrer, and Kamptee 
CFs), Chhattisgarh ( Mand-Raigarh, 
Korba, Bishrampur etc. CFs) and 
West Bengal (Raniganj CF) meters. 
Other 
state-level 
contributions 
included, Odisha (Talcher and Ib 
Valley CFs), and Jharkhand (Jharia, 
North Karanpur, and West Bokaro 
CFs).
	
Non-CIL Funding:
	
Exploration 
in 
Non-CIL 
blocks 
accounted for the largest share of 
the drilling performance in 2025-26, 
covering 55 blocks with a total of 6.81 
lakh meters of drilling. This included 
6.45 lakh meters for detailed coal 
exploration (0.18 lakh meters in NER) 
and 0.36 lakh meters for detailed lignite 
exploration in Non-NER regions.



	
77
	
Through Non-CIL funding, coal exploration included 6.45 lakh meters of drilling, driven 
primarily by large-scale operations in Chhattisgarh (Mand-Raigarh, Sonhat, Tatapani-
Ramkola and Korba) and Madhya Pradesh (Pench Kanhan Tawa Valley, Singrauli, and 
Sohagpur). Additional significant coal drilling occurred in Maharashtra (Kamptee and 
Wardha Valley), Jharkhand (North Karanpura, Ramgarh Gola, and Auranga), Nagaland 
(Jhanzi-Disai Valley), Odisha (Talcher and Ib Valley), and West Bengal (Rajmahal-Birbhum). 
Lignite exploration added 0.36 lakh meters, with Rajasthan (Bikaner and Palana Basin) 
contributing the vast majority, alongside minor activity in Jammu & Kashmir and Tamil Nadu 
(Ramnad).
	
Promotional Funding:
	
The Promotional funding of MoC under CSS scheme, supported regional exploration 
activities across 32 blocks. The regional coal drilling accounted for 1.21 lakh meters, 
covering both NER (0.22 lakh meters) and Non-NER (0.99 lakh meters) regions.
	
This fund supported widespread exploration in 11 states, with notable achievements in 
Chhattisgarh (Sonhat, Tatapani Ramkola, and Mand-Raigarh) and Jharkhand (Raniganj, 
Auranga and Rajmahal-Birbhum). Other active states included Odisha (Talcher and Ib 
Valley), Maharashtra (Wardha Valley), Nagaland (Jhanzi-Disai Valley), and Arunachal 
Pradesh (Namchik Nampuk). The sector also included exploration in Madhya Pradesh 
(Pench Kanhan Tawa Valley, Sohagpur and Singrauli), Assam (Makum and Mikir Hills), 
Mizoram, Sikkim (Rangit Valley), and Telangana (Godavari Valley).
	
Block Allocattee Funding: CMPDIL took detailed coal exploration in 6 blocks allocated to 
different entities through auction. The total drilling achievement was 0.27 lakh meters. The 
majority of this work was localized in Jharkhand, which contributed 0.26 lakh metres, while 
in Odisha total 0.007 lakh metres drilling carried out.
	
NMEDT Funding: To support diversification, CMPDIL executed exploration in 2 blocks, 
achieving 515 meters for coal in the Pench Kanhan Tawa Valley of Maharashtra and 54 
meters in non-coal (Magnetite) exploration in Jharkhand.
	
Table 1.1.3A: Summary of Fund-wise Drilling Achievements by CMPDIL in FY 2025-26
S.N.
Funding Source
No. of Blocks 2025-26
FY 2025-26 (m) FY 2024-25 (m) Growth %
1.
CIL
57
3,20,871.50 
2,81,630.85 
14%
2.
Non-CIL
55
6,80,959.80 
4,46,265.00 
53%
3.
Promotional
32
1,21,252.30 
2,56,701.40 
-53%
4.
Block Allocattee
6
26,847.20 
19,497.50 
38%
5.
NMEDT
2
569.00 
7,458.40 
-92%
Grand Total
152
11,50,499.80 
10,11,553.15 
14%
1.2	
Geological Reports:
1.2.1	 A total area of approximately 415 sq. km. was explored during FY 2025–26 through 31 
Geological Reports, resulting in an estimated total coal resource of about 18.5 billion tonnes, 
including 11.8 billion tonnes in the Measured (Proved) category.


78
	
Of the total exploration, Detailed Exploration covered around 306 sq. km. through 24 Geological 
Reports, leading to the estimation of approximately 11.8 billion tonnes of coal resources in the 
Measured (Proved) category and about 3.0 bt of resources in Indicated category. In addition, 
Regional (Promotional) Exploration was carried out over about 109 sq. km. through 7 Geological 
Reports, resulting in the estimation of around 3.7 billion tonnes of new coal resources in the 
Indicated and Inferred categories.
	
Table 1.2.1A: Summary of the Geological Reports prepared during 2025-26
Type of Block/ 
Fund
No. of 
GRs
Area (sq. 
km.)
Estimated Resource (MT)
Total
Measured
Indicated
Inferred
CIL
12
172.69
4,752.47 
2,034.63 
-   
6,787.10 
Non-CIL
11
132.80
6,999.89 
961.20 
-   
7,961.09 
Promotional
6
85.70
-   
3,213.85 
0.95 
3,214.80 
NMEDT
1
23.26
-   
-   
498.30 
498.30 
Consultancy
1
0.70
16.19 
-   
-   
16.19 
Total
31
415.15
11,768.55 
6,209.68 
499.25 
18,477.48 
1.2.2	 Of the total exploration, projects funded under Coal India Limited (CIL) accounted for 12 
Geological Reports covering 172.69 sq. km., with an estimated resource of 6,787.10 MT, 
including 4,752.47 MT in Measured and 2,034.63 MT in Indicated categories.
1.2.3	 Exploration under Non-CIL funding contributed 11 Geological Reports over 132.80 sq. km., 
resulting in an estimated resource of 7,961.09 MT, comprising 6,999.89 MT in Measured and 
961.20 MT in Indicated categories.
1.2.4	 Promotional exploration covered 85.70 sq. km. through 6 Geological Reports, leading to the 
estimation of 3,214.80 MT of resources, including 3,213.85 MT in Indicated and 0.95 MT in 
Inferred categories.
1.2.5	 Exploration undertaken under NMEDT funding covered 23.26 sq. km. through 1 Geological 
Report, resulting in an estimated 498.30 MT of resources in the Inferred category.
1.2.6	 Consultancy-funded exploration accounted for 1 Geological Report over 0.70 sq. km., with an 
estimated resource of 16.19 MT in the Measured category.
1.3	
Hydrogeology
1.3.1	 During F.Y. 2025-26, CMPDIL achieved a significant milestone by submitting 136 Comprehensive 
Hydrogeological Reports (CHR) and 136 Groundwater Modelling Reports to the Ministry of 
Jal Shakti (CGWA). These submissions fulfill the statutory requirements mandated for the 
mining sector by the CGWA Gazette Notification (effective September 2020) for obtaining No 
Objection Certificates (NoC).
1.3.2	 The department prepared and submitted 20 Hydrogeological Reports specifically for the 
formulation of Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and Environmental Management Plans 
(EMP) for various mining projects during the fiscal year.
1.3.3	 A total of 25 specialized studies were completed, covering a broad spectrum of technical 
requirements, including: Piezometer chapters and Geological/Project Reports, Damage 
Assessment Reports etc.



	
79
1.3.4	 Water supply schemes and integrated hydrogeological chapters.CMPDIL continues to execute 
regional groundwater level and quality-monitoring services. This includes the submission 
of annual compliance reports to the CGWA and MoEF&CC for cleared projects across CIL 
subsidiaries, including ECL, BCCL, CCL, NCL, and MCL.
1.3.5	 Other specialized jobs / Outside Consultancy job / new type of studies –
1.3.5.1	The Hydrogeology Section, in collaboration with the Exploration Department, developed a 
pioneering study report titled “Mine Water Utilization in Abandoned Mine Voids-Coal India.” 
This study, submitted to the Ministry of Coal, represents a new frontier in sustainable water 
management.
1.3.5.2	To enhance future domain expertise, the department successfully procured ArcGIS Pro 
Enterprise licenses and advanced Groundwater Modelling Software (GMS). These tools are 
central to the department’s strategy for high-end skill development and specialized service 
delivery.
1.4	
Geophysical Surveys:
1.4.1	 Downhole Geophysical Logging: Geophysical logging of exploration boreholes was 
undertaken to obtain in-situ information regarding the subsurface strata intersected during 
drilling. During 2025–26, a total of 6.102 lakh metres of downhole geophysical logging was 
completed in CIL, Non-CIL, Promotional, NMET, and Consultancy projects using multi-
parametric geophysical logging systems. Out of the total achievement, 2.521 lakh metres were 
logged departmentally through six geophysical logging units, whereas 3.581 lakh metres were 
executed through contractual agencies.
1.4.2	 Surface Geophysical Surveys: A total of 455.228 Line KM of 2D/3D seismic survey was 
carried out through departmental as well as outsourced resources during the year. Out of the 
total 455.228 Line KM, 345.584 Line KM of 2D seismic survey was executed departmentally in 
seven blocks, namely Dip-side of Ukni-Pimpalgaon & Niljay Block in Wardha Valley Coalfield, 
Dhanpura Block in Sohagpur Coalfield, Sarasthali South Deep & Itapara South Blocks in 
Raniganj Coalfield, Bojea Block in Mand-Raigarh Coalfield, Renki, Bhilai & Bhilai-Bazar Blocks 
in Korba Coalfield, Yekona Block in Wardha Valley Coalfield, and Bagra Block in Tatapani-
Ramkola Coalfield. In addition, about 109.644 Line KM of 2D/3D seismic survey was carried 
out through outsourced agencies.
	
Table 1.4.2 A: Performance of Seismic Survey by CMPDIL (Y-o-Y Basis)
Agency
Annual 
Target
2025-26 
(Line km)
Seismic Survey in FY 
2025-26 (Line km)
FY 2024-25 
(Line km)
Growth (%)
Achiev.
Achiev. 
(%)
I. Departmental
250
345.584
138%
300.024
15%
II. Outsourcing
200
109.644
55%
137.927
-21%
Total
450
455.228
138%
437.951
4%


80
	
Further, CMPDIL also undertook Electrical Resistivity and Magnetic Surveys in CIL and Non-
CIL blocks for delineation of coal seam in-crops and identification of dyke intrusions. During FY 
2025–26, about 60.478 Line KM of Electrical Imaging Survey, gravity survey at 204 stations, 
and about 46.760 Line KM of Magnetic Survey were carried out.
	
In addition, CMPDIL has been carrying out NGPM work awarded by GSI since February 2026. 
So far, data acquisition has been completed at 895 stations against the total awarded scope of 
8,694 stations.
1.4.3	 Reports: A total of 33 geophysical reports and geophysical chapters were submitted during 
2025–26. Out of these, 10 were scheduled geophysical reports, while 23 comprised geophysical 
chapters incorporated in Geological Reports. Among the 10 scheduled reports, three pertained 
to seismic surveys, three to resistivity imaging surveys, and four to integrated geophysical 
surveys.
1.5	
Drilling Performance in North Eastern Region (NER) and Jammu & Kashmir
	
CMPDIL’s drilling performance in the North Eastern Region reflects a year of positive growth. 
Total drilling increased from 38,048 m in 2024 25 to 40,230.9 m in 2025 26, marking a 6% 
overall growth.
	
Assam, although Assam has been historically the primary contributor, this year Nagaland 
registered a strong upswing with a 101% increase, emerging as the main driver of regional 
growth. Mizoram also showed a notable 787% rise, signaling expanded exploration efforts. 
Drilling activity in Sikkim commenced only in 2025 26, adding to the regional totals and 
broadening CMPDIL’s operational footprint.
	
During the year, CMPDIL also initiated drilling operations in Jammu & Kashmir, where one 
Lignite block was taken up for detailed exploration under Non-CIL funding from the Ministry of 
Coal (MoC). A total of 310.50 m of drilling was completed in the region.
	
Table 1.5 A: Drilling Performance by CMPDIL in NER States in 2025-26
States
2025-26 (m)
2024-25 (m)
Growth (%)
Coal
Arunachal Pradesh
4,300.00
Assam
4,258.00
25,541.00
-83%
Mizoram
4,206.00
474.00
787%
Nagaland
24,179.60
12,033.00
101%
Sikkim
3,287.30
 
 
Total
40,230.90
38,048.00
6%
1.5.1	 Critical Minerals & REE studies
	
Sample collection for testing the enrichment of REEs/critical minerals during the exploration 
stage has been undertaken by CMPDIL to generate baseline data for mineral commodities 
other than coal.



	
81
	
By March 2026, Samples of 44 coal blocks including 49 boreholes and 13801 samples, 
as detailed below, have been sent to MECL and NML laboratories for analysis of mineral 
commodities other than coal.
	
The analysis results for 21 boreholes, comprising 5,503 samples have been received. The 
results of 16 boreholes involving 5326 samples have been submitted to the Ministry of Coal 
(MoC) and Ministry of Mines (MoM). Whereas, analysis results of another 5 boreholes/177 
samples has been received and will be incorporated in the Geological Report.
	
Pursuant to the Office Memorandum issued by the Ministry, CMPDIL also has started 
exploration of critical minerals in new projects and recovery from overburden (OB), dumps, 
and tailings of existing mines of Eastern Coalfields Limited (ECL), Bharat Coking Coal 
Limited (BCCL), Central Coalfields Limited (CCL), Northern Coalfields Limited (NCL), and 
Mahanadi Coalfields Limited (MCL).
	
So far, a total of 17 dumps have been identified across different subsidiary coal companies. 
About 230 samples have been collected and sent to designated laboratories for enrichment 
studies.
1.5.2	 Coal Block Auction and Other Activities 
•	
Mine Summary Preparation for Auctioning of coal blocks: Coal Mine Summary 
preparation for auctioning of coal blocks prepared successfully for total 2 tranches launched 
in financial year 2025-26:
a) 	Tranche 13 (August 2025) – offered blocks 14, Auctioned blocks 3.
b) 	Tranche 14 (October 2025) – offered blocks 41, Auctioned blocks 5.
• 
Geological block Boundary certification: Certification completed for 9 coal block 
boundaries as per MoC 2024 mandate.
•	
Updating OCBIS application in Web: Updation of OCBIS portal with 55 coalfields with 
latest 1096 coal block boundaries.
•	
National Geoscience Data Repository (NGDR): Sharing data for National Geoscience 
Data Repository (NGDR) completed for 87 coal blocks and uploaded about 22 Geological 
Report for NMET in the NGDR portal.
•	
Skill development: Skill development and training to executives across departments/
disciplines and industries on GIS application in coal exploration using softwares like ArcGIS 
and QGIS, 3D modelling softwares using Vulcan, Minex.
•	
In FY 2025-26, CMPDIL has developed Single Window Clearance System (SWCS)- 
Exploration Module for approval of Exploration Scheme and Geological Reports, in line 
with Govt. of India’s Digital India vision.
•	
CMPDIL prepared the report “Coal Resources & Exploration in North Eastern Region” 
to highlight the region’s coal potential and provide a roadmap for enhanced exploration, 
reduced coal imports, and improved energy security for India.


82
•	
This 
year, 
CMPDIL 
successfully 
brought out the 2nd edition of the ‘Coal 
Atlas of India’, providing an updated 
and comprehensive repository of 
India’s coal resources and geological 
information.
2.	
COAL BED METHANE (CBM) 
2.1 
Underground Coal Gasification
	
A UCG R&D Project titled “A pilot project 
on Underground Coal Gasification (UCG) 
to establish technology in Indian geo-
mining conditions” is being implemented 
by CMPDIL, ECL and Ergo Exergy 
Technologies Inc. (EETI), Canada.
	
The project comprises of Two (02) 
Phases. Phase-I involving Site Selection, 
Characterization & Pre-Feasibility Study 
successfully completed on 31st May, 2025.
	
Phase-II 
of 
the 
Project 
comprising 
of Pilot Plant Design, Construction, 
Commissioning, Operations, Shutdown 
and 
Post-Shutdown 
Monitoring 
commenced on 20th June, 2025 and 
currently under implementation.
2.2 	 Coal Bed Methane (CBM)
a. 	
Collaborative commercial development of 
CBM in Jharia Coalfield by the consortium 
of CIL & ONGC 
	
Govt. of India allotted Jharia CBM 
Block to the consortium of ONGC–CIL 
on nomination basis for commercial 
development of CBM in 2002. CMPDIL 
is Technical Consultant to CIL for 
Development of Jharia CBM Block.
	
Jharia CBM Block is under Development 
Phase and 13 no of Development Wells 
have been drilled upto March,26. Creation 
of surface facility including pipeline laying 
work is in progress. Tie-in connection of 
GAIL’s Urja Ganga Pipeline with the block 
by GAIL is expected by May’ 2026.
b.	
CBM Development in CIL Leasehold 
Area
	
Govt. of India in partial modification of 
CBM Policy 1997, vide notification dated 
8th May, 2018 granted permission to 
Coal India Limited and its subsidiaries to 
explore and exploit CBM from its areas 
under Coal Mining Lease.
	
CMPDIL is Principal Implementing Agency 
(PIA) for the development of CBM in CIL 
leasehold areas i.e. BCCL, ECL & SECL.
	
Three (03) CBM blocks are presently 
under consideration in CIL Leasehold 
areas: 1.) Jharia CBM Block-I (BCCL), 
2.) Raniganj CBM Block (ECL), 3.) Jharia 
CBM Block-II (BCCL).
	
Jharia CBM Block-I (BCCL leasehold 
area) has been awarded to M/s Prabha 
Energy Limited (PEL) for extraction of 
CBM on revenue sharing basis. The Block 
is currently under Exploration Phase. 
Drilling of 05 Exploratory Coreholes and 
04 Test Wells have been completed.
	
Also, Raniganj and Jharia CBM Block-
II have been proposed to be developed 
after selection of CBM developer through 
tendering.
C.	
CBM LAB
	
CBM and Shale gas related studies 
under 
Promotional 
Exploration/
Regional/Detailed Exploration during 
2025-2026 by CBM Lab
	
CMPDIL is carrying out studies related to 
"Assessment of Coalbed Methane Gas-
in-Place Resource of Indian Coalfields/
Lignite fields" through boreholes drilled 
during promotional/ regional/ detailed 
exploration. CBM Lab under Promotional 
Exploration programme completed field 
desorption studies in 19 boreholes for 
CBM and 5 boreholes for Shale Gas in FY 
2025-26.



	
83
	
Gas permeability and Helium Porosity 
Tests were completed in 131 samples 
for CBM and Shale gas, Total Organic 
Content (TOC) analyses and Rock Eval 
Pyrolysis studies have been completed in 
07 boreholes for shale gas.
	
This study creates the data base for 
assessment of CBM & Shale gas 
potentiality 
and 
facilitate 
delineation 
of more blocks for CBM & Shale gas 
development.
	
Additionally, CBM specific analysis have 
been carried out for CIL Subsidiaries and 
outside clients.
D.	
Collaboration with Directorate General 
of Hydrocarbons (DGH)
	
CMPDIL has signed a Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU) with Directorate 
General of Hydrocarbons (DGH) in 
May 2025 for collaboration in data 
sharing and technology transfer related 
to the development of unconventional 
hydrocarbon resources such as Coal 
Bed Methane (CBM) and Shale Gas as 
a significant step towards enhancing 
cooperation in the energy sector.
3.	
PROJECT PLANNING & DESIGN
	
As 
prioritized 
in 
consultation 
with 
subsidiary companies of Coal India 
Limited, preparation of Project Reports 
(PR) for new/expansion/reorganisation 
mines was carried out during the year 
2025-26  for 30 Project Reports (PR) with 
incremental capacity addition of about 148 
Mty.  It includes 11 PRs for underground 
mining projects and 19 PRs for opencast 
projects. Revision of Project Reports/Cost 
Estimates for projects was also taken up 
as per the requirement.
	
In addition to above, the following jobs 
were also undertaken:
•	
Preparation of Conceptual/Feasibility 
Reports, 
Tender/Bid 
Documents, 
Evaluation of Bids, etc. for new/
existing 
coal 
washeries/deshaling 
plant
•	
Environment 
Management 
Plan 
(EMP) 
•	
Mining Plans and Mine Closure Plans 
of OC and UG mines
•	
Mine capacity assessment of opencast 
and underground mines of CIL.
•	
Various technical studies relating to 
operation of opencast & underground 
mines.
•	
Performance 
analysis 
of 
HEMM 
operating in OC mines of CIL.
•	
Data dossier and MDO Documents for 
mines 
•	
Risk Assessment study
•	
Scheme for Highwall Mining Projects
•	
Soil Erosion Study
•	
Project 
Management 
Consultancy 
Services for Civil works, ETP/STP, 
Solar Power Plants, etc.
•	
Comprehensive 
Hydrogeological 
Reports with Ground water modelling 
•	
Coal Evacuation Master Plan/Master 
Plan of Coalfields
•	
Specific consumption in opencast 
mines of CIL for diesel, explosive and 
electric power
•	
Detailed design and drawings, NIT, 
tender scrutiny, etc.
	
During 
the 
year 
2025-26, 
expert 
consultancy services were also provided 
to subsidiary companies of Coal India 
Limited in the field of Environmental 
Management and Monitoring, Remote 
Sensing Studies, Land use/land cover and


84
vegetation cover mapping, Energy Audit 
(Diesel & Electrical) and Benchmarking 
of Opencast mines, Illumination Survey, 
Physico-mechanical tests on Rock and 
Coal 
Samples, 
Subsidence 
Studies, 
Strata Control, Non-Destructive Testing 
(NDT), Controlled Blasting & Vibration 
Studies and Explosive Utilisation, Mining 
Electronics, 
Petrography 
Study 
on 
coal samples, Coal Core Processing & 
Analysis, Washability tests, OBR Survey, 
Carrying capacity of coal mining areas/
riverine ecosystem, Slope Stability Study, 
Scientific Sand Replenishment Study, 
Effluent/Sewerage 
Treatment 
Plants, 
Mine Closure Auditing, etc.
	
During the year 2025-26, a total of 333 
reports have been prepared. The break-
up of reports prepared has been given 
below:
REPORTS
Nos.
Geological Reports 
 31
Project Reports 
 30
Draft EMPs/Form-I/IV/VI 
 67
Other Studies
205
TOTAL
333
Details of Reports prepared during the 
period 2025-26 are given below:
LIST OF COMPLETED REPORTS DURING 2025-26
Regional 
Institute/HQ
   Name of  the Reports
Geological Reports:
RI-I
1.
Khileriat (Promotional)
2.
Tamra (Non-CIL)
3.
Aturia (Non-CIL)
4.
Lalpur (Promotional)
RI-II
1.
Barimahuli South (Promotional)
Regional 
Institute/HQ
   Name of  the Reports
RIII
1.
Duni Central (Consultancy)
2.
Gola (Non-CIL)
RI-IV
1.
Bhagwanpur North
2.
Dahegaon Makardhokra-IV
3.
West of Urdhan Jamunia (NMET)
RI-V
1.
Singhpur North Part
2.
Mahai East (Non-CIL)
3.
Mahai West (Non-CIL)
4.
Karichapar West (Non-CIL)
RI-VI
1.
Patpaharia
2.
Jhara North (Non-CIL)
RI-VII
1.
Takua (Non-CIL)
2.
Tribira
Contractual
1.
Lotapani (Promotional)
2.
Nagar-Shivpur
3.
Behratoli
4.
Tatapani-III
5.
Rajdhar (Non-CIL)
6.
Gangapur (Promotional)
7.
Ghunguti
8.
Dumdih
9.
Hemagiri Sector-I
10.
Rajadahi (Promotional)
11.
Tangardihi East (Non-CIL)
12.
Bhelmi
13.
Changki B (Non-CIL)
Project Reports:
RI-I
1.
Chita East Expn. OC
2.
Parascole Jambad UG
RI-II
1.
Block-F Reorganised OC
2.
Block-D OC
RI-III
1.
Pundi OC RPR
2.
KDH OC RPR
3.
Rajrappa OC RPR
4.
Magadh OC RPR



	
85
Regional 
Institute/HQ
   Name of  the Reports
RI-IV
1.
Ukni-Pimpalgaon Expn. OC - Amalgamated
2.
Inder Kamptee Deep Side Expn. OC
3.
Shaktigarh UG
4.
Bellora Naigaon Deep Side Expn.  OC
5.
Makardhokda I & IV OC
6.
Tawa-III UG Mine
RI-V
1.
Durgapur OC RPR (MDO option)
2.
Kartali East OC 
3.
Binkara UG RPR
4.
Beheraband UG Expn.
5.
Jampali Expn. OC
6.
Ongaon Potia OC
RI-VII
1.
Balbhadra North & West Extn. Block OC
2.
Lakhanpur-Belpahar-Lilari 
Expn. 
OC 
Integrated RPR
3.
Basundhara West Extn. OC RPR
HQ
1.
Labji Pusla Sector-I UG
2.
New Godhur Kusunda UG
3.
Rabodih OC (Non-CIL)
4.
Churi Benti UG
5.
Inguri UG
6.
Ananta UG
7.
Parej East UG
Environment Management Plan:
Form-I (including Form III, IV & VI)
RI-I
1.
Cluster No. 1 (Group of 8 Mines) (EC 
Amendment)
2.
Cluster No. 9 (Group of 11 Mines) (EC 
Amendment)
3.
Cluster No. 10 (Group of 14 Mines) (EC 
Amendment)
RI-II
1.
Cluster-XVII (EC Amendment)
2.
Cluster-VIII (EC Amendment)
RI-III
1.
Churi Benti UGP (Expansion in Area)
2.
Basantpur Tapin Coking Coal Washery (EC 
Amendment)
3.
North Urimari OCP
4.
Karo Expansion OCP (EC Amendment)
Regional 
Institute/HQ
   Name of  the Reports
RI-IV
1.
Gadegaon OC
2.
Penganga OC (EC Amendment)
3.
Gauri Pauni Expn OC (Expansion in capacity)
4.
Mungoli Nirguda OC (EC Amendment)
5.
Pauni II OC (EC Amendment)
6.
Sasti Expn. OC (EC Amendment)
7.
Amalgamated Yekona I & II OC (Expansion 
in capacity)
8.
Singhori OC (Expansion in capacity)
9.
Mungoli Nirguda Expn. Deep OC (Expansion 
in capacity)
10.
New Majri UG to OC (Expansion in capacity)
11.
Amalgamated Inder Kamptee (Expansion in 
capacity)
12.
Niljai OC (Expansion in capacity)
13.
Niljai OC (EC Amendment)
14.
Mungoli Nirguda OC (EC Amendment)
15.
Makardhokra-I OC (Expansion in capacity)
16.
Ballarpur NW OC
17.
Yekona-I & II OC  (EC Amendment)
RI-V
1.
Rajendra UG (Revalidation of EC)
2.
West Jhagrakhand (Revalidation of EC)
3.
Bijuri UG (Revalidation of EC)
4.
Dipka OC Expansion (with increased land)
5.
Gevra OC (EC Amendment)
6.
Jhilimili Expn. UG (Expansion in capacity)
7.
Batura OC (EC Amendment)
8.
Gayatri Expn. UG (EC Amendment)
9.
Rampur Batura OC (Expansion in capacity)
10.
Manikpur OC (Expansion in capacity)
11.
Saraipali OC (Expansion in capacity under 7 (ii))
12.
Vijay West UG (Expansion in capacity under 7(ii))
13.
Baroud OC (Expansion in capacity)
14.
Porda Chimtapani OC
15.
Chhal OC Expansion (Expansion in capacity)
16.
Baroud OC (Expansion in capacity and Land))
RI-VI
1.
Krishnashila OCP (EC Amendment)
2.
Jayant OCP (EC Amendment)
3.
Khadia OCP (Expansion in capacity)
RI-VII
1.
Garjanbahal OCP (EC Amendment)
Draft EMP


86
Regional 
Institute/HQ
   Name of  the Reports
RI-II
1.
Cluster - IX (Expansion in capacity)
2.
Shivani UG, SECL (Expansion in capacity)
RI-III
1.
Ashok Expn. OCP (Expansion in Area & Capacity)
2.
North Urimari OCP (Expansion)
3.
Churi Benti UG (Expansion in Project Area)
4.
Chhal OC Expn., SECL
RI-IV
1.
Kolgaon OC (Expansion in capacity)
2.
Gauri Pauni Expn. OC (Expansion in capacity)
3.
New Majri UG to OC (Expansion in capacity)
4.
Amalgamated Inder Kamptee OC (Expansion 
in capacity)
5.
Mungoli Nirguda Expn. Deep OC (Expansion 
in capacity)
6.
Niljai OC (Expansion in capacity)
RI-V
1.
Kurasia UG (Revalidation of EC)
2.
Amdand UG and Bartarai (Kewai) UG 
(Revalidation of EC)
3.
Rajnagar UG (Revalidation of EC)
4.
Khairaha UG Expansion Project 
5.
Dipka OC Expansion (with increased land) 
(Expansion in capacity)
RI-VI
1.
Bina OCP (Expansion in capacity)
2.
Jhilimili Expn. UG, SECL (Expansion in 
capacity)
RI-VII
1.
Integrated 
Lakhanpur-Belpahar-Lilari 
(capacity expansion under 7(ii) clause)
HQ
1.
Ghonsa Expn. Deep OC (Expansion in Area 
& Capacity)
4.0	
COAL & MINERAL PREPARATION
	
Coal & Mineral Preparation Division 
offers technical consultancy services 
for Greenfield Coal washeries, Mineral 
beneficiation plant and Modification / 
Modernization of existing plants. These 
services encompass exhaustive laboratory 
studies, Preparation of Pre-Feasibility 
Report (PFR), conceptual report (CR), 
bid 
process 
management, 
contract 
document preparation and assistance in 
award of works followed by scrutiny of 
drawings during project execution. It also 
renders wide range of R&D services and 
corporate support. CMP Lab is accredited 
from National Accreditation Board(NABL) 
for Testing and Calibration Laboratories. 
Such reorganized body is considered 
as the first essential step for facilitating 
mutual acceptance of test results.
	
The Division is equipped with ISO 
certified modern laboratory with latest and 
sophisticated equipment for carrying out 
laboratory scale studies. 
	
The following major jobs have been 
completed by this Division during the year 
2025-2026.
4.1.	
Conceptual Reports.
●	 Conceptual Report for setting up of 
non-coking coal washery (5.0Mty) at 
Talabira OCP, NLCIL.
●	 Conceptual report on India’s First Dry 
Deshaling Plant in CIL by CMPDIL at 
Chitra mine of ECL
4.2.	
Feasibility / Pre-Feasibility Reports 
& Detailed Study Report
●	 Feasibility report for setting up of 
Deshaling plant/washery for Balaram 
mine in MCL.
●	 Feasibility report for setting up of 
washery for Kulda-Garjanbahal mine 
in MCL.
●	 Feasibility report for setting up of 
Deshaling plant at Bina-Kakri OCP in 
NCL.
●	 Pre-feasibility Project Report (PFR) 
on BOM Basis for setting-up of 2.5 
MTPA New Moonidih Coal Washery.
●	 PFR on BOO concept for Dhori 
washery (3.0 Mtpa), CCL.
4.3.	
Tender Document 
●	 CIL’s First Model EPC Bid Document 
for Washeries has been prepared 
and sent to CIL which will help in 
standardization and streamlining the 
process for EPC-based washeries 
across CIL subsidiaries.



	
87
●	 Tender specific document (RFQ along 
with PFP) in e-tendering mode on 
BOO concept for Dhori washery (3.0 
Mtpa).
●	 Tender Document (RFQ alongwith 
RFP) in e-tendering mode on BOM 
Basis for setting-up of 2.5 MTPA New 
Moonidih Coal Washery.
●	 Bid document on BOO basis for 
setting up of Dry Deshaling Plant at 
Chitra East OCP, ECL
4.4.	
SCRUTINIZING OF CONSTRUCTION 
DRAWINGS
●	 Scrutiny & vetting of Design & 
Drawings for Renovation of existing 
1.6 MTPA Moonidih Coal Washery on 
turnkey basis for BCCL.
●	 2.5 Mty Patherdih Drawing Scrutiny, 
BCCL 
4.5.	
PREPARATION OF CHAPTERS
	
Washery chapter of Amrapali washery 
(30 Mty), RPR Magadh OCP (40 Mty), 
CCL; Jampali OC EXPN. (20 Mty); 
ONGAON POTIA OC (10.0 Mty), SECL; 
BEHERABAND UG EXPN (2.20 Mty); 
Bellora Naigaon Expansion Deep OC 
Washery, WCL; Block D & F, BCCL and 
Basundhara, MCL
4.6.	
R&D ACTIVITIES
●	 R&D proposal initiated for development 
of an Indigenous Technology for Coal 
Winnowing (TRL-4 to TRL-8/9, Dry 
Coal Beneficiation (4x8 TPH) Pilot 
Plant at Gondegaon mines of WCL – 
Nagpur area was deliberated in 48th 
Apex Committee meeting.
●	 Up gradation of high ash Indian 
coal through physical and chemical 
beneficiation. PIA - IIT Kharagpur, SIA 
- i) CMPDIL ii) BCCL iii) MCL
4.7.	
CORPORATE SUPPORT
●	 Provided support w.r.t. committee 
constituted to prepare a strategy to 
augment Washed coal production and 
Washery Infrastructure in Country.
5.0 	
PROJECT APPRAISAL
5.1	
Scrutiny and appraisal of 30 nos. of draft 
PRs/RPRs/EPRs prepared by Regional 
Institutes and HQ Departments of CMPDIL 
during the year 2025-26 and coordination 
for their presentation at CMPDIL(HQ) 
before finalization of the report. 
5.2	
Scrutiny and appraisal of 16 nos. of 
conceptual notes prepared by Regional 
Institutes during the year 2025-26, 
and coordination for their assessment 
by Director (T/P&D) along with OC/
UMD Department and PAD for finalizing 
the main technical parameters before 
preparation of the draft PR/RPR/EPR. 
5.3	
A 
report 
on 
‘operationalisation 
of 
coal blocks available with subsidiary 
companies of CIL and augmentation of 
coal resources’ has been prepared. 
5.4	
Exercise for viability of higher grade 
unviable coal blocks. 
5.5	
Updation of Extractable Reserves of 
India. 
5.6	
Timely 
completion 
of 
miscellaneous 
assignment of CIL and MoC
6.0	
OPEN CAST MINING
6.1	
Major Outside Consultancy jobs 
completed are:
●	 Mining and Mine Closure Plan for 
Banai/Bhalumuda coal blocks, M/s 
Jindal Power Ltd.
●	 Revised Mining and Mine Closure 
Plan for Sarisatolli coal block, M/s 
CESC Ltd


88
●	 Revised Mining and Mine Closure 
Plan for Amelia coal block, M/s THDC 
India Ltd
●	 Project Report for Rabodih coal block, 
M/s 21st Century Mining Pvt. Ltd.
●	 Technical Note on Chotia I and II coal 
block, M/s BALCO Ltd
●	 Estimation of Mining Charge for Naini 
MDO, M/s SCCL
●	 REE Block Potential: Estimates of 
mining potential, production schedule, 
and cost of production prepared for 
2 Rare Earth Element (REE) blocks 
— Nawatola Devigarh and Ontillu 
Chandragiri — reflecting diversification 
beyond coal
●	 Preparation/Customization of MDO 
document of WBPDCL
6.2	
Major CIL Jobs completed are:
•	
Mining Plan and Mine Closure Plan for 
Block E (15 Mty), BCCL 
●	 Scientific study for slope stability of 
dumps esp near cental flank of CHP 
in Jayant OCP, NCL.
●	 Scientific study for slope stability for 
Rohini OCP, CCL
●	 Scientific Study for Slope Stability of 
Amrapali OC, CCL
●	 Scientific Study for Rajrappa OC, Maa 
Kamakaya OS patch, CCL
●	 Scientific Study for Ukni Pimpalgaon 
OC, WCL
●	 Soil Erosion Study for Kedla, CCL
●	 Soil Erosion Study for Amrapali, CCL
●	 Soil Erosion Study for KDH, CCL
●	 Soil Erosion Study for Purnadih, CCL
●	 GeM 
compatible 
document 
for 
continuous miner, CIL
●	 GeM compatible Model NIT docs for 
deploying LHD and SDL, CIL
●	 NIT Preparation for Introduction of 
High Speed PSLW in Jhanjra UG, ECL
●	 Scheme for NIT document preparation 
for Balkudra Highwall, CCL
●	 Sand Replenishment studies for 5 
rivers in Bihar, Government of Bihar
●	 Assessment of Capacity of opencast 
mines of CIL – Projection as on 
01.04.2026.
●	 Assessment of capacity and capacity 
utilization for Opencast mines of CIL 
during 2024-25.
●	 Technical and Financial appraisal of 
Project Reports.
7.0.	
UNDERGROUND MINING
7.1	
CIL 
Jobs 
(Completed 
Reports/ 
Jobs)
●	 Abridged PR, MCA & RFB for  Makri 
Borka UG Project of NCL.
●	 Project report of Labji Pusla UG, SECL.
●	 Scientific study for depillaring with 
caving of standing on pillars accessible 
through Incline 4/5/6 and Incline 7/8, 
Dhori Khas UG, Dhori Area, CCL.
●	 Scientific 
study 
for 
conducting 
Pressure Survey of the mine, and to 
establish the causes of spontaneous 
heating and fire in 4,5,6 Incline of Dhori 
(K) Colliery by a scientific agency.
●	 Preparation of GeM compatible Model 
NIT for Continuous Miner for CIL
●	 Ventilation simulation modelling for 
Shaktigarh UG Mines, WCL.
●	 RPR of Churi Benti UG, CCL and 
Mining Plan and Mine Closure plan.
●	 Project report of Inguri UG, NCL



	
89
●	 Preparation of " Mining Plan and Mine 
Closure plan excluding GMJJ land of 
Piparwar phase-I UG (Area: 426.88 
HA) to expedite operationalization of 
the UG Project
●	 Conceptual 
note 
on 
Dongrital-
Patpaharia Coal Blocks, NCL.
●	 3D Subsidence Prediction Study in 
Churi Benti, CCL.
●	 Preparation of Project report of Parej 
East UG in Hiring of Equipment (HoE) 
mode and mine closure plan (as per 
new mining plan guidelines).
●	 Submitted design of Air shaft for 
drivage of proposed return air shaft 
as per approved RPR (final)-2024 at 
Waghoda UG Mine under Saoner Sub 
Area, Nagpur Area
●	 3D Subsidence Prediction Study in 
Sharda UG Mine Kanhan Area 
7.2	
CIL Jobs (Draft Report Submitted) 
ONGOING
●	 Preparation of estimate and NIT for 
the work “Deepening of existing shaft 
A, B, C, D & E at Jhanjra Area, ECL.
●	 Preparation of RFB & MCA of 
Brahmani North Coal Block of ECL.
●	 Preparation a Model NIT for the work 
of deploying LHD / SDL on hiring 
basis / risk gain sharing basis with and 
without provision for coal evacuation 
along with possible Scope of Work, 
Eligibility Criteria and other required 
Modalities for implementation of the 
Model.
●	 UCE, RFB, MCA of Makri Borka, NCL
●	 Preparation of Global Tender Document 
for engagement of a consultant for 
preparation of comprehensive road 
map plan of BCCL.
●	 Preparation of MDO Document – 
Mandwa Blocks, Bander Coalfield of 
WCL in Nagpur.
7.3	
Outside 
Consultancy 
Jobs 
(Completed Reports/ Jobs)
●	 Preparation of Document for Global 
EOI for selection of Mining Operator 
for DPDH block of WBPDCL.
●	 Vetting of MDO Tender Document 
(REP & CMSA) of Sugia Closed Coal 
Mine.
7.4	
JOBS FOR MOC
●	 Preparation of Document for Global 
EOI for selection of Mining Operator 
for DPDH block of WBPDCL.
●	 Mine dossier of 11th, 13th and 14th round 
of commercial coal block auction has 
been submitted to MoC. 
●	 List of coal blocks for UCG is under 
finalization. 
●	 Submission of reply to pre-bid queries 
and other technical assistance to MoC 
of coal block related issues
8.0	
CIVIL ENGINEERING SERVICES
●	 Constr 
The 
Civil 
Engineering 
Department of CMPDIL, serves as the 
principal technical consultancy arm of 
Coal India Limited for civil, structural, 
architectural, and related engineering 
disciplines. 
During 
the 
financial 
year 
2025–26, 
the 
Department 
continued to discharge this mandate 
with vigour, executing a diverse 
portfolio of assignments spanning 
project 
management 
consultancy, 
detailed design, drawing scrutiny, 
environmental 
and 
hydrological 
studies, 
tender 
preparation, 
and 
structural assessments. Cumulatively, 
these activities supported capital 
investment across the full breadth 
of CIL's subsidiary operations — 
from 
infrastructure 
development 
and environmental compliance to


90
renewable energy integration and 
industrial capacity building.
	
The pages that follow present a 
consolidated 
narrative 
account 
of 
the 
Department's 
principal 
activities during the year, organised 
by 
functional 
category. Together, 
they 
reflect 
an 
organisation 
of 
demonstrated 
technical 
depth, 
sustained operational output, and 
growing scope — equipped to support 
Coal India's development objectives in 
an increasingly complex engineering 
and regulatory environment.
8.1 	
Project Management Consultancy
Total Assignments Executed
28 Assignments
	
During the year under review, the Civil 
Engineering Department undertook a 
substantial portfolio of project management 
consultancy assignments, underscoring 
its central role as a technical resource 
for Coal India Limited and its subsidiary 
companies. The thrust of this activity 
was the comprehensive transformation 
of residential and social infrastructure 
in 
coal-field 
areas, 
encompassing 
architectural design, supervision, and 
quality control for facelifting of employee 
colonies, service buildings, and support 
facilities 
across 
multiple 
operational 
areas. The Department guided these 
projects from conceptualisation through to 
execution oversight, ensuring adherence 
to design intent, construction standards, 
and budgetary discipline.
	
Beyond 
colony 
development, 
the 
Department 
managed 
the 
planning 
and execution of institutional facilities 
including hostels, training centres, and 
office complexes, contributing to the 
human 
resource 
and 
administrative 
infrastructure 
of 
the 
organisation. 
Significant consultancy services were 
also directed towards the development 
of eco-parks, recreational water parks, 
and green public spaces — initiatives that 
reflect CIL's commitment to the social and 
environmental well-being of its workforce 
and host communities.
	
In 
the 
domain 
of 
environmental 
infrastructure, the Department provided 
project management support for the 
installation of sewage treatment plants 
using 
advanced 
Sequential 
Batch 
Reactor 
(SBR) 
technology, 
enabling 
responsible treatment and disposal of 
wastewater from residential colonies. 
Guest 
houses, 
conference 
facilities, 
and vocational training centres across 
several subsidiaries were also taken up, 
reflecting the breadth and versatility of the 
Department's consultancy capability.
8.2 	
Design & Drawing Scrutiny — Solar 
Projects
Figure 2 : Proposed Watch Tower — Eco-Park at 
Balaram, MCL
Figure 1 : Master Plan — Proposed Eco-Park 
Development at Balaram, MCL



	
91
Solar Projects Reviewed
6 Projects
	
In 
consonance 
with 
Coal 
India's 
accelerating renewable energy agenda, 
this Department carried out technical 
scrutiny and vetting of design drawings 
for a series of solar photovoltaic power 
projects during the year. The assignments 
spanned a range of installation types 
and scales — from smaller captive 
installations to large utility-scale ground-
mounted arrays — including a floating 
solar photovoltaic plant, representing 
one of the more innovative deployment 
formats in the sector.
	
The scrutiny process encompassed a 
comprehensive review of civil, structural, 
and 
electrical 
components, 
verifying 
that 
foundations, 
module 
mounting 
structures, cable management systems, 
control rooms, and associated civil 
works conformed to applicable national 
codes, structural safety norms, and 
project-specific 
requirements. 
The 
combined installed capacity reviewed 
during the year ran into 110 megawatts, 
providing significant assurance for capital 
investments in clean energy infrastructure 
across the CIL group
8.3 	
Design & Drawing Scrutiny — FMC & 
Other Projects
Scrutiny Assignments Completed
20 Assignments
	
Technical 
scrutiny 
and 
vetting 
of 
structural, civil, and electro-mechanical 
design drawings for FMC infrastructure 
constituted one of the most voluminous 
categories of work during the year. 
Assignments 
covered 
coal 
handling 
plants, 
coal 
washeries, 
mechanised 
rail sidings, coal preparation facilities, 
and high-capacity electrical substations 
spread 
across 
multiple 
subsidiary 
companies — representing a diverse 
cross-section of core coal processing and 
Figure 5: Renovation/ Face-lifting of Guest House & Office 
— NEC Guwahati
Figure 3 : Proposed Roads & Weigh Plaza at Gevra, SEC
Figure 4 : Proposed Multi-storeyed Residential Quarters — 
Vasant Vihar, Bilaspur, SECL


92
transportation infrastructure.
	
In addition to FMC-related assets, the 
Department scrutinised designs for large-
capacity heavy equipment maintenance 
workshops, coal weighing and dispatch 
systems, and complex multi-transformer 
substation configurations. This vetting 
function serves as a critical quality 
gateway, ensuring structural adequacy 
and 
regulatory 
compliance 
before 
construction commences. The volume 
and diversity of scrutiny assignments 
during the year testify to the Department's 
broad multi-disciplinary expertise and its 
indispensable role in safeguarding capital 
investment quality across the group.
Figure 6 : Washery Plant at IB Valley Lakhanpur-MCL 
(Design Scrutiny)
Figure 7: Conveyor system of CHP Construction 
(Design Scrutiny)
8.4	
Project Planning
Project Reports Processed
2 Assignments
	
The Department contributed to corporate-
level investment planning by preparing 
and updating the civil engineering cost 
components of project reports for new 
mine developments, and by conducting 
technical vetting of project reports and 
revised project reports submitted through 
the 
Project 
Appraisal 
Department. 
This function is foundational to sound 
capital 
decision-making 
— 
ensuring 
that civil cost estimates embedded in 
project reports are technically rigorous, 
consistent with prevailing schedules of 
rates, and reflective of current design 
standards, thereby supporting informed 
and defensible investment approvals at 
the Board level
8.5	
Civil & Architectural Detailed Design
Design Assignments
8 Assignments
	
The Department carried out in-house 
preparation 
of 
detailed 
civil 
and 
architectural designs for a range of projects 
during the year. Work included structural 
design 
for 
bridges 
spanning 
mine-
area drainage streams, comprehensive 
technical schemes for effluent treatment 
plants, and detailed design of high-
capacity electrical substations. Structural 
repair, 
retrofitting, 
and 
rehabilitation 
services were also provided for ageing 
plant infrastructure at operating mines, 
extending the functional life of critical 
assets.
	
A strategically significant assignment 
during the year involved a comprehensive 
study on the utilisation of mine water from 
both active and abandoned coal mines 
— a subject of increasing operational 
and environmental importance as mining 
operations mature. The Department also



	
93
prepared construction drawings for wind 
barriers along coal transport corridors 
as part of dust mitigation initiatives, and 
prepared mining plans and mine closure 
plans, reflecting an expanding scope 
into mine environmental planning and 
regulatory compliance.
8.6	
Hydrological Studies
Studies Completed
5 Assignments
	
Hydrological investigations and nallah 
diversion 
studies 
were 
conducted 
for opencast coal mining projects as 
mandatory inputs to the environmental 
clearance 
process. 
These 
studies 
comprised 
detailed 
catchment 
area 
analysis, estimation of design flood 
parameters using recognised hydrological 
methods, 
and 
hydraulic 
design 
of 
diversion channels to safely route natural 
watercourses around operational mine 
areas without adversely affecting the 
broader drainage regime.
	
One assignment involved a wide-area 
hydrology 
study 
encompassing 
an 
assessment of the impact on water bodies 
within a designated buffer zone around a 
major opencast project, together with the 
formulation of a restoration action plan 
— a condition stipulated under the Terms 
of Reference granted by the Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
(MoEF&CC). These studies demonstrate 
the Department's integrated capability in 
mine water resource management and its 
ability to support subsidiaries in meeting 
their statutory environmental obligations
8.7	
Outside Consultancy Assignments
External Assignments
2 Assignments
	
The 
Department 
extended 
its 
specialised 
technical 
expertise 
to 
organisations outside the CIL group by 
undertaking design & drawing scrutiny 
for the development of coal handling 
infrastructure on an turnkey basis. This 
category of external engagement reflects 
the growing recognition of CMPDIL's 
technical competence, contributes to 
institutional revenue generation, and 
reinforces the Department's standing as a 
credible and sought-after consultancy in 
the coal infrastructure domain
Figure 8: SILO Construction at RG3 OC, Singareni  
(SCCL) 
8.8	
Tender Documents, Estimation & 
Scheme Preparation
Tender & Feasibility Documents
17 Assignments
	
Preparation 
of 
detailed 
technical 
schemes, cost estimates, and tender 
documents encompassing both technical 
and commercial components formed 
a significant and diverse body of work 
during the year. The scope covered a wide 
range of infrastructure categories: coal 
handling plants, high-voltage electrical 
substations, 
equipment 
maintenance 
workshops, dust suppression systems, 
roads and plazas, and sewage treatment 
facilities. 
The 
Department 
prepared 
documents 
under 
conventional 
NIT-
based tendering frameworks as well as 
specialised procurement modes including


94
Build-Own-Operate (BOO) concepts and 
turnkey/EPC formats.
	
Feasibility and pre-feasibility reports 
were also prepared for major capital 
investments in washeries, deshaling 
plants, and conveyor transport systems, 
providing the technical and financial 
foundation 
for 
investment 
appraisal 
and 
Board-level 
decision-making. 
The breadth of this category spanning 
civil, structural, mechanical, electrical, 
and environmental works, reflects the 
Department's 
comprehensive 
multi-
disciplinary capability and its critical role 
as an internal technical resource for 
subsidiaries across the Coal India group.
8.9    Structural Adequacy Study
Tender & Feasibility Documents
17 Assignments
	
A structural adequacy assessment was 
conducted for an existing coal handling 
plant to evaluate the integrity, residual 
strength, and load-bearing capacity of 
the structure following extended years 
of operational service under demanding 
process conditions. The study involved 
detailed structural analysis, systematic 
site inspection, and appraisal of original 
design 
parameters 
against 
current 
structural 
conditions. 
Findings 
and 
recommendations from such assessments 
provide the evidential basis for decisions 
on 
continued 
operation, 
targeted 
maintenance interventions, or structural 
reinforcement 
— 
thereby 
ensuring 
operational safety and optimising the life-
cycle value of capital-intensive processing 
infrastructure.
	
Taken together, the work of the Civil 
Engineering 
Department 
in 
2025–
26 
demonstrates 
the 
organisation's 
consistent ability to deliver high-quality 
technical 
services 
across 
a 
wide 
spectrum of disciplines and project types. 
As Coal India advances its production, 
environmental, 
and 
infrastructure 
development objectives, the Department 
remains committed to providing the 
engineering 
rigour 
and 
consultancy 
excellence on which these goals depend.
List of Works
PROJECT MANAGEMENT CONSULTANCY 
1)	
Construction of Hostel building of IICM, 
Ranchi.
2)	
Architectural 
and 
allied 
consultancy 
services with SQC (Supervision and 
Quality Control) for face-lifting of colonies 
including residential and service buildings 
with additional infrastructures to be 
developed in Lakhanpur area of MCL.
3)	
Architectural 
and 
allied 
consultancy 
services with SQC (Supervision and 
Quality Control) for face-lifting of colonies 
including residential and service buildings 
with additional infrastructures to be 
developed in Hingula area of MCL.
4)	
Architectural 
and 
allied 
consultancy 
services with SQC (Supervision and 
Quality Control) for face-lifting of colonies 
including residential and service buildings 
with additional infrastructures to be 
developed in Lingaraj area of MCL.
5)	
Architectural 
and 
allied 
consultancy 
services with SQC (Supervision and 
Quality Control) for face-lifting of colonies 
including residential and service buildings 
with additional infrastructures to be 
developed in Jagannath area of MCL.
6)	
Architectural 
and 
allied 
consultancy 
services with SQC (Supervision and 
Quality Control) for face-lifting of colonies 
including residential and service buildings 
with additional infrastructures to be 
developed in Bharatpur area of MCL.
7)	
Architectural 
and 
allied 
consultancy 
services with SQC (Supervision and 
Quality Control) for face-lifting of colonies



	
95
including residential and service buildings 
with additional infrastructures to be 
developed in Talchar area of MCL.
8)	
Architectural 
and 
allied 
consultancy 
services with SQC (Supervision and 
Quality Control) for face-lifting of colonies 
including residential and service buildings 
with additional infrastructures to be 
developed in I B Valley area of MCL.
9)	
Architectural 
and 
allied 
consultancy 
services with SQC (Supervision and 
Quality Control) for face-lifting of colonies 
including residential and service buildings 
with additional infrastructures to be 
developed in MCL HQ, Sambalpur.
10)	
“Planning 
, 
design, 
engineering, 
construction, 
fabrication, 
erection, 
supply, installation, testing, trial run and 
commissioning of 03 nos stps of 200 kld 
capacity each based on sequential batch 
reactor (sbr) technology for hospital colony 
, lapanga colony and patel nagar colony of 
barka-sayal area of CCL, consisting of all 
civil, structural, electrical and mechanical 
works and all other accessories and 
facilities required including construction 
of complete sewage networks to make it 
complete in all respect on turnkey basis 
including operation for six years and 
comprehensive maintenance of plant & 
other infrastructures for five years after 01 
year warranty period”.
11)	
Architectural 
and 
allied 
consultancy 
services with SQC (Supervision and 
Quality Control) for Construction of GM 
Office Mahalaxmi Area cum Project Office 
of Siarmal OCP at Mahalaxmi Area of 
MCL.
12)	
Architectural 
and 
allied 
consultancy 
services with SQC (Supervision and 
Quality Control) for Construction of Group 
Vocational Training Centre (GVTC) at 
Jagannath Area of MCL.
13)	
Architectural and allied works with SQC 
(Supervision and Quality Control) for 
Development of Eco park- 3 Nos at 
various locations of MCL.
1. 	 Shramik Gaurav Water Park at 
Gandhisagar of Balram OCP under 
Hingula Area
2. 	 Eco Park (Phase II) in Orient Colliery 
Mine no 04 under Orient Area)
14)	
Construction of Sports complex and other 
development works at IICM, Ranchi.
15)	
Architectural 
and 
allied 
consultancy 
services with SQC (Supervision and 
Quality Control) for face-lifting of colonies 
including residential and service buildings 
with additional infrastructures to be 
developed in Basundhara area of MCL.
16)	
Repair and Renovation works at IICM, 
Kanke, Ranchi.
17)	
Architectural and allied work of preparation 
of DPR for Construction of Eco Park at 
Wani Area, WCL.
18)	
Architectural 
and 
allied 
work 
for 
preparation 
of 
DPR 
for 
Design, 
Construction and installation of multiple 
weigh bridges cum boom barriers and 
Construction of Roads and Plazza along 
with associated infrastructures at Gevra 
Project of SECL.
19)	
Project management Consultancy and 
Statistical quality control for refurbising / 
face-lifting of Guwahati office and guest 
house of NEC/CIL.
20)	
PMC 
for 
preparation 
of 
DPR 
for 
construction of residential quarters at 
Vasant Vihar Colony clony, SECL.
21)	
PMC services for the Development of Eco-
Park at Ambara OC, Pench area,WCL.
22)	
Project 
Management 
Consultancy 
(PMC) Services on Work of Design and 
installation of multi lane Weighbridges


96
and Automatic Boom Barriers at Entry-
Exit points of Kusmunda OCP & Dipka 
OCP, SECL by preparing DPR including 
preparation of architectural drawings and 
allied services etc.
23)	
Architectural 
and 
allied 
work 
for 
preparation 
of 
DPR 
for 
Design, 
Construction of STP(s) of total capacity 
2.0 MLD along with sewer networks and 
associated developments at Koyla Nagar, 
BCCL, Dhanbad.
24)	
Preparation of Detailed Project includes 
Architectural and allied services for 
Renovation and Upgradation of IWSS for 
Talcher Coalfields, Lingaraj Area, MCL.
25)	
Preparation of Detailed Project Report 
(DPR) for the work Construction of 424 
nos. residential quarters at Kaniha OCP, 
Kaniha Area, MCL.
26)	
Preparation of Scheme, NIT/ tender 
documents, 
Drawing 
scrutiny, 
the 
renovation work and detailed estimate 
for the work of Complete operation and 
maintenance of Maheshpur SILO plant 
for the period of 5 years including cost 
of Refurbishment Cost (maintenance & 
overhauling) of P&M
27)	
Architectural and allied work with SQC 
(Supervision and Quality Control) for 
(i)	 Construction of Multi level car parking 
cum auditorium at WCL HQ.
(ii)	 Construction of mini stadium at 
INDORA.
(iii)	Construction 
of 
school 
including 
residential quarters at Punwat village 
under Wani Area of WCL.
28)	
Architectural and allied work of preparation 
of DPR for
(i)	 Renovation/extension of Guest House 
along with development works at 
Jagruti Vihar, MCL HQ
(ii)	 Construction of Guest House(suites) 
cum conference hall at Bhubaneswar 
campus of MCL
DESIGN/ DRAWING SCRUTINY OF SOLAR 
PROJECTS:
1)	
23 MW Solar Power Project Majari Area 
(Telwasa, Dhurvasa & Navin Kunada), 
WCL.
2)	
5 MW Solar Power Project Chandrapur, 
WCL.
3)	
70 MW Solar Power Project Nandan 
Washery Kanhan Area, WCL.
4)	
5  MW Floating Solar Photo Voltaic Plant 
at Salanpur Area, ECL.
5)	
8.5 MW Solar Power Project at B&K Area, 
CCL.
6)	
1.03 MW Solar Power Project at Magadh, 
Amrapali & Piparwar , CCL.
DESIGN/ DRAWING SCRUTINY OF FMC & 
OTHER PROJECTS:
1)	
Scrutiny of design/drawing for Patherdih 
washery, BCCL.
2)	
Scrutiny of design/drawing for Janjhra 
CHP, ECL.
3)	
Scrutiny of design/drawing for Kaniha 
CHP, MCL.
4)	
Scrutiny of design/drawing for HURA-C 
CHP, ECL.
5)	
Drawing scrutiny of 190T dumper repair 
workshop at Amlohri OCP, NCL.
6)	
Drawing scrutiny of Block B OCP 
workshop, NCL.
7)	
Drawing scrutiny of 190T dumper repair 
workshop at Jayant OCP, NCL.
8)	
Drawing 
scrutiny 
of 
CWS 
Jayant 
(upgradation), NCL.
9)	
Scrutiny of design/drawing for Lakhanpur 
washery, MCL.
10)	
Scrutiny of design/drawing for Dipka 
Mechanized Siding, SECL.



	
97
11)	
Scrutiny of design/drawing for Kusmunda 
Central Inpit, SECL. 
12)	
Scrutiny of design/drawing for Chaal CHP 
& Subsatation, SECL.
13)	
Scrutiny of design/drawing for Manikpur 
CHP & silo, SECL.
14)	
Drawing 
scrutiny 
of 
Bina-Kakri 
Amalgamation OCP workshop, NCL.
15)	
Drawing Scrutiny of KHADIA OCP CHP.
16)	
Drawing scrutiny of Amrapali CHP, CCL.
17)	
Scrutiny & vetting of design and drawings 
for renovation of existing 1.6 Mtpa 
Moonidih coal washery, BCCL on turnkey 
basis.
18)	
Drawing Scrutiny of Magadh (CHP 51.0 
MTY)
19)	
Drawing scrutiny for the work - Renovation 
of Surface Belt Conveyor at Churi U/G 
Mines, NK Area.
20)	
Design, Engineering, Supply, Installation, 
Testing and Commissioning of (2X16 
MVA+2X10 MVA), 33/11 kV Central 
Substation, Balanda which includes all the 
electrical outdoor and indoor equipment, 
illumination, earthing, lightning protection, 
signaling & control, firefighting, SCADA, 
civil & structural including all accessories 
and facilities required to make it complete 
in all respects with maintenance during 
defect liability period (DLP) on Turnkey 
Basis at Jagannath Area, MCL.
PROJECT PLANNING JOBS:
A.	
PR preparation/Cost Updation of civil part 
of
	
1. Naini Coal Mine (10 Mty), SCCL
B.	
Technical vetting of PR/RPR for 10 nos. of 
reports forwarded to this department for 
technical vetting by PAD throughout the 
year.
CIVIL & ARCHITECTURAL DETAILED 
DESIGN & DRAWING JOBS/ETP/STP:
1)	
Construction of bridge over Mangerdha 
Nalla under Religara Project, Argada 
Area, CCL.
2)	
Structural repair, restoration, retrofitting, 
rehabilitation, strengthening & facelifting 
of existing CHP at Nigahi OCP.
3)	
Comprehensive Scheme with all technical 
design and financial cost estimate for ETP 
at Dudhichua Project.
4)	
Comprehensive study related to Mine 
Water 
Utilization 
from 
Active 
and 
Abandoned Coal Mines.
5)	
Preparation of drawing and construction 
drawings for construction of wind barrier 
along coal corridor from BBSRI SILO 
junction to Shanti Nagar field workshop, 
along the MGR siding No-01, Balunga 
ROB-4 to MGR Siding.
6)	
Dismantling 
and 
construction 
of 
community 
structures 
of 
Jarangdih, 
Kathara Area, CCL.
7)	
Preparation of Mining Plan & Mine Closure 
Plan and detailed project report (DPR) 
for Rabodih OPC coal mine located in 
Hazaribagh, Jharkhand.
8)	
Construction of one no. new 3x16 MVA, 
33 kV/6.6 kV coal substation with state of 
art technology & safety at Bina NCL.
HYDROLOGICAL STUDIES JOBS:
1)	
Pundi OCP Nallah Diversion, CCL
2)	
Diversion plan of Bangaru Jhor stream 
and a detailed hydrology study with 
proper restoration action plan of the water 
bodies which are already damaged within 
the 10km buffer zone of the study area" 
in respect of Bharatpur OCP (20 Mty; 
Area Expansion-927.42 ha to 1556.94 
ha) as per ToR granted by MoEF&CC on 
28.06.2022.


98
3)	
Study of diversion of 06 nos. of Nalah 
at Patratu ABC, UGP, Sanghmitra OCP, 
Chandragupta OCP, Pundi OCP, Ashok 
Exploration and Argada OCP. 
4)	
Rejuvenation of Traditional water body in 
CCL,SECL,MCL & WCL
5)	
Comprehensive 
Study 
Report 
on 
Mine Water Utilisation from active and 
abandoned mine voids of CIL
OUTSIDE JOBS:
1)	
Consultancy service contract for setting 
up of Coal handling plant at RGOC3 6 
CHP. RG2 Area on EPC mode.
2)	
Consultancy service contract for setting 
up of Coal handling plant at RGOC3 6 
CHP. RG2 Area on EPC mode.
PREPARATION OF TENDER DOCUMENT/
ESTIMATION/SCHEME:
1)	
Preparation of NIT, estimate (Vol II & III) for 
coal handling plant (2.5 Mty) of Mohanpur 
OCP (Ph-II), Salanpur Area, ECL.
2)	
NIT 
for 
Construction 
of 
2X2MVA,11kV/3.3kV 
Substation 
at 
Bonjemehari OCP, Salanpur Area, ECL.
3)	
Construction of approach PQC road 
and boundary wall for Super Speciality 
Hospital at Kanke Road, CCL.
4)	
Scheme for installation of fixed water 
sprinkler system (Fog-Mist) type all along 
the haul road leading to Railway siding, 
CHP and OB dump Area at Nigahi OCP, 
NCL.
5)	
Construction of bridge over Mangerdha 
Nalla under Religara Project, Argada 
Area, CCL.
6)	
Preparation 
of 
NIT(Technical 
& 
Commercial) for installation of secondary 
sizers(-100mm) at the existing Jayant 
CHP, NCL.
7)	
Preparation of feasibility study report 
for detail technical feasibility report for 
installation of conveyor transport system( 
especially pipe conveyor transport system 
as per suitability) at Kusunda Area and 
also preparation of DPR.
8)	
Planning, designing, estimation and NIT 
preparation for workshop/Running repair 
dumper shed at Khadia Project.
9)	
Preparation of scheme, Estimation and 
NIT preparation for installation of Pre-
weigh truck loading hopper in 2 mines of 
CCL.
10)	
Feasibility Study report of complete 
refurbishment of existing 10.5 MTY CHP 
at Rajmahal Area
11)	
Preparation of NIT/Tender document- 
Renovation, 
upgradation 
and 
strengthening of old CHP (10 Mtpa).
12)	
Preparation of scheme & NIT for 
Supplying, Erection & Commissioning of 
Dynamometer at CWS Jayant, NCL on 
turnkey basis.
13)	
Preparation of NIT alongwith estimated 
cost for the work of 33/6.6kV Substation 
at Khottadih UG,ECL
14)	
Preparation of Scheme, Estimate, and 
NIT' for the supply, erection, testing, 
and commissioning of 2 nos. 33/6.6 
kV E-House substations with 10MVA 
transformers for the Dudhichua project, 
NCL on turnkey basis
15)	
Preparation of Pre-feasibility report (PFR) 
& TSD/Tender specific document (RFQ 
alongwith RFP) in e-tendering mode 
on BOO concept for setting up of Dhori 
coking coal washery (3.0 Mtpa), CCL.
16)	
Preparation of Feasibility Report for 
setting up of Deshaling plant/washery for 
Balaram Mine, MCL.



	
99
17)	
Preparation of feasibility report for setting 
up Integrated Kulda-Garjanbahal non-
coking coal washery in MCL.
9.	
ELECTRICAL AND MECHANICAL 
ENGINEERING SERVICES
	Jobs carried out in FY 2025-26
9.1	
Mine Planning (Infrastructure)
	
 Preparation of Project report/
RPR.
 
 Regional Institute I.
●	
PR 
for 
Pandaveswar 
Dalurband UG & OC Mine 
(2.52 MTY).
●	
PR for Parascole Jambad UG 
Mine( 1.20 MTY).
●	
PR for Chitra East Expansion 
OCP (4.0  MTY).
	
 Regional Institute II.
●	
Project report of Block D OCP 
of BCCL.
●	
Project report of Block F OCP 
of BCCL.
 
 Regional Institute III.
●	
KDH OCP (6.75 Mty) RPR.
●	
Magadh OCP (51.0 Mty) RPR.
●	
Amrapali OCP (30.0 mty) 
RPR.
 
 Regional Institute IV.
●	
Amalgamated Inder Kamptee 
OCM, WCL (5.0 Mty).
●	
MKD-IV, WCL (5.0 Mty).
●	
Bellora Naigoan  OCM, WCL 
(2.00 Mty).
●	
Shaktigarh UG, WCL (1.6 Mty)
●	
Tawa III, WCL (0.84 Mty).
●	
Ukani Pimpalgaon OCM, WCL 
(5.00 Mty).
 
 Regional Institute V.
●	
Gevra OCP Expansion ( 70-85 
Mty).
●	
Amritdhara UG.
●	
Badauli UG.
●	
Behrabandh Expn. UG.
●	
Bodri UG.
●	
Durgapur OC.
●	
Jampali OC.
●	
Kewai UG.
●	
Ongaon Potia UG.
●	
Singhali UG.
 
 Regional Institute VI.
●	
Nigahi RCE.
●	
Independent 
Engineer 
for 
Outside Consultancy (Amelia 
OCP).
●	
Master plan of Main basin 
NCL.
	
 Regional Institute VII.
	
 Preparation of Project Reports.
●	
Bhalabhadra North West Expn. 
PR (10 Mty), Bhalabhadra 
area, MCL.
●	
Basundhara West Extn. PR 
(8.5 Mty), Basundhara area, 
MCL.
●	
ILBL Expn. PR (50 Mty), 
Lakhanpur area, MCL.    
 
 Updation of Project reports / cost 
estimate. 
 
 Regional Institute IV.
●	
Parsoda OCM.
●	
Silori OCM.
●	
Wanoja OCM.
●	
Sanjam UG.
●	
Visapur mine.
●	
Thesgora mine.
●	
Konda Hardola mine.
●	
Silewara Deep UG mine.
9.2	
Coal handling Plant: Preparation of 
e-tender documents:
 
 Head Quarter


100


	
100
●	
Structural repair, restoration, 
retrofitting, 
rehabilitation, 
strengthening & facelifting of 
existing CHP at Nigahi OCP. 
●	
Preparation of scheme for 
installation of Pre-weigh truck 
loading hopper in 2 mines of 
CCL.
 
 Regional Institute III.
●	
NIT for Sanghamitra CHP 
(20.0 Mty).
 
 Regional Institute IV.
●	
Saoner 1 UG mine, Nagpur 
Area, WCL (1.2 MTY).
 
 Regional Institute V.
●	
Amadand CHP (4 Mty), K&K 
Area.
●	
Kusmunda 
Truck 
Loading 
Systen (7.-7.5 Mty).
●	
Dipka Central inpit conveying 
system for Public Silo.
●	
Katkona Bunker & CHP.
 
 Regional Institute VI.
●	
NIT for Jayant STP.
 
 Regional Institute VII.
●	
Preparation of scheme/e-NIT 
for CHP (17.5 MTY) at Balram 
OCP.
●	
NIT and cost estimate for the 
upcoming conveyor circuits 
of Kulda-Garjanbahal CHP at 
Barpali bulb.
●	
Preparation of Scheme, NIT 
& Cost estimate for 2 MTY 
Truck Loading System at 
Samelshwari OCP, MCL.
●	
Preparation of Scheme, NIT & 
Cost Estimate for 3 MTY Truck 
Loading System at Ananta 
OCP, Jagannath Area, MCL.
●	
Preparation of Scheme, NIT & 
Cost Estimate for 3 MTY Truck 
Loading System at Hingula 
OCP, Hingula Area, MCL.
●	
Preparation of Scheme, NIT & 
Cost Estimate for 3 MTY Truck 
Loading System at Bharatpur 
OCP, Bharatpur Area, MCL.
9.3	
Workshop & Store: Preparation of 
e-tender documents.
 
 Head Quarter.
●	
Preparation of scheme & 
NIT for Supplying, Erection 
& 
Commissioning 
of 
Dynamometer at CWS Jayant, 
NCL on turnkey basis.
 
 Regional Institute VII.
●	
Construction of HEMM & E&M 
workshop complex along with 
store under approved PR of 
Lakhanpur–Belpahar-Lilari 
Integrated project.
9.4	
Substation: Preparation of e-tender 
documents.
 
 Head Quarter.
●	
Preparation of NIT & cost 
estimate 
for 
construction 
of 3x16 MVA, 33 Kv/6.6 Kv 
substation at Bina OCP, NCL.
●	
Preparation 
of 
Scheme, 
Estimate, and NIT' for the 
supply, erection, testing, and 
commissioning of 2 nos. 33/6.6 
kV E-House substations with 
10MVA transformers for the 
Dudhichua project, NCL on 
turnkey basis.
●	
Preparation of NIT alongwith 
estimated cost for the work 
of 33/6.6kV Substation at 
Khottadih UG,ECL.
 
 Regional Institute III.
●	
Preparation of Scheme and 
NIT for darbhanga House 
Substation.
●	
Preparation of Scheme and 
Tender Document for MRSS 
Substation ,B&K AREA.



	
101
●	
Preparation 
of 
Scheme 
and Tender documents for 
33KV switching station cum 
substation at Kalyani OCP, 
Dhori area.
●	
Preparation of NIT for ashoka 
OCP Substation.
	
	
Regional Institute IV.
●	
Tawa III UG Substation - 2 x 5 
MVA, 33/3.3 kV.
●	
Gauri Pauni Substation - 2 x 
12.5 MVA, 33/6.6 kV.
●	
Bhanegaon OC Substation - 2 
x 6.3 MVA, 33/6.6 kV.
●	
MKD 1 OC Substation - 2 x 5 
MVA, 33/6.6 kV.
●	
Gondegaon OC substation- 2 
x 6.3 MVA, 33/6.6 kV.
●	
Majri UG to OC substation- 
2x10MVA, 33/6.6KV.
 
	
Regional Institute V.
●	
33kV Substation at Porda 
Chimtapani 
OCP, 
Raigarh 
Area, SECL.
●	
33kV Substation at Amadand 
OCP, J&K Area.
●	
33kV Substation at Vasant 
Vihar Colony, SECL(HQ).
●	
11kV Substation at Ambika 
OCP, Korba Area.
 
	
Regional Institute VII.
●	
Preparation 
of 
e-NIT 
& 
cost estimate for the job of 
“3x12.5MVA, 33/6.6/3.3 KV 
substation at south quarry 
as per the integrated PR of 
Lakhanpur-Belpahar-Lilari 
OCP.
●	
NIT 
for 
Design, 
Drawing 
and 
Cost 
Estimate 
for 
Commissioning of 2X10 MVA, 
33_6.6 kV Project Substation 
at Balaram OCP.
●	
Preparation of e-NIT with 
cost estimate and drawing 
scrutiny for the work "Design, 
supply, 
erection, 
testing, 
commissioning, 
trial 
run 
and O&M for construction 
of 
2x1MVA, 
33/0.415 
kV 
Substation 
at 
MINREM, 
Bhubaneswar.
●	
Preparation of e-NIT with 
cost estimate for 2x5 MVA, 
33/6.6 kV Project substation at 
Hingula OCP and 33kV double 
circuit OHTL on tower from 
132/33 kV Nandira Substation 
to 
Project 
substation 
at 
Hingula OCP as per RPR of 
Hingula OCP.
●	
Preparation of Scheme, NIT & 
Cost Estimate for Construction 
of a new Engine testing shed 
and 
a 
new 
Transformer 
repairing shed for Central 
Workshop, Talcher.
●	
Preparation 
of 
Design, 
Drawing, 
e-NIT 
and 
cost 
estimate for the work "Supply, 
Installation & commissioning 
of 20 MVA, 220/33KV Power 
transformer 
at 
Bay 
no.3 
alongwith complete reviving 
of the Bay including SCADA 
system for the entire substation 
at 220/33 KV grid substation, 
Basundhara Area, MCL.
●	
Preparation 
of 
Design, 
Drawing, NIT and cost estimate 
for Construction of 33kv double 
circuit Overhead Transmission 
Line from 132/33 kV Nandira 
substation to Lingaraj OCP, 
Lingaraj Area.


102
9.5	
Scrutiny/Approval of Drawings of 
CHP’s / Workshop/Substation.
 
	
Head Quarter.
●	
Drawing Scrutiny of Amrapali 
CHP (25 MTY).
●	
Drawing Scrutiny of CHP at 
Block B OCP (4.5 Mtpa).
●	
Drawing Scrutiny of RG OC 
CHP.
●	
Drawing Scrutiny of Dudhichua 
workshop.
●	
Drawing 
Scrutiny 
of 
Bina 
Kakari 
Amalgamation 
Workshop.
●	
Drawing 
scrutiny 
for 
construction of 33/11 Kv s/s at 
Giddi washery    Argada ,CCL
●	
Drawing scrutiny of Churi CHP, 
CCL. 
 
	
Regional Institute I.
●	
Drawing Scrutiny of CHP - 
Kumardihi B, Bankola Area.
 
	
Regional Institute III.
●	
Drawing Scrutiny of Magadh 
CHP (51 Mty).   
●	
Drawing Scrutiny of KDH- 
Purnadih CHP (7.5 Mty).
●	
 Drawing Scrutiny of Karo CHP 
(7.0 Mty).
●	
Drawing Scrutiny of Konar 
OCP Substation.
●	
Drawing Scrutiny of Rajrappa 
OCP Substation. 
●	
Drawing Scrutiny of Magadh 
CHP Alternate Arrangement 
(10 Mty).
●	
Drawing Scrutiny Moonidih 
washery Electrical Portion.
 
	
Regional Institute IV.
●	
Drawing Scrutiny of CHP’s.
●	
Mungoli-Nirguda 
OCM 
(10 
MTY), Wani Area, WCL. 
●	
Dinesh OCM (8 MTY). Umrer 
Area, WCL.
●	
Makardhokra-I OC Expansion 
Project, Umrer Area, WCL. 
(4.90 MTY).
●	
Gauri-Pauni-Sasti OC Project, 
Ballarpur Area, WCL (10 MTY).
●	
Amalgamated 
Dhankasa-
Jamunia, Pench Area, WCL 
(2.0 MTY).
●	
Sharda UG, Kanhan Area, 
WCL (1.0 MTY).
●	
Drawing scrutiny of Substation:
●	
Mungoli 
Nirguda 
OC 
Substation - 2 x 6.3 MVA, 
33/6.6 kV.
●	
Dinesh OC Substation -
	
i. 2 x 7.5 MVA, 33/6.6 kV. 
	
ii. 2 x 6.3 MVA, 33/11 kV.
●	
Saoner UG Substation - 2 x 5 
MVA, 33/3.3 kV.
●	
Amalgamated Inder-Kamptee 
(Deep) OC Substation - 2 x 5 
MVA, 33/6.6 KV.
●	
Dhankasa Substation - 2 x 6.3 
MVA, 33/6.6 kV.
 
	
Regional Institute V.
●	
Drawing scrutiny of CHPs:
a)	 Rampur Batura CHP (4 Mty).
●	
Drawing scrutiny of Substation:
a)	 33kV Substation at Dipka 
OCP.
b)	 33kV Substation at Shiwani 
UG, Bhatgao Area, SECL.
c)	 33kV Substation at Katkona 
UG , Baikunthpur Area, SECL.
d)	 33kV 
Substation 
at 
NSN 
Colony , SECL(HQ), Bilaspur.
e)	 33kV Substation at Manikpur. 
OCP, Korba Area, SECL.



	
103
f)	
33kV Substation at Rampur 
Batura OCP, Sohagpur Area, 
SECL.
 
	
Regional Institute VI.
●	
Drawing Scrutiny of 1300 KW 
Roof Top Solar Projects of 
NCL Projects.
●	
Drawing Scrutiny of 1200 KW 
Roof Top Solar Projects of 
NCL Projects.
●	
Drawing Scrutiny of Block-B 
Sub-station of NCL Projects.
●	
Drawing Scrutiny of Khadia 
CHP (04 Mtpa) of NCL. 
 
	
Regional Institute VII.
●	
Drawing Scrutiny for Coal 
Transportation 
from 
TRH 
to TH-2 of Bhubaneswari 
CHP (u/c) – 10 MTY at 
Bhubaneswari Area, MCL.
●	
Drawing 
scrutiny 
for 
the 
construction of CHP for coal 
transportation (10 MTY) from 
head end of pipe conveyor 
at TH-2 
to 
SILO 
(under 
construction) at Hingula OCP 
of Hingula Area.
●	
Drawing scrutiny for Design, 
supply, 
commissioning 
and 
maintenance 
during 
DLP 
for 
construction 
of 
Project 
Substation-I 
and 
OH transmission line  at 
North Quarry of Integrated 
Lakhanpur-Belpahar-Lilari 
OCP.
●	
Drawing 
scrutiny 
of 
sub-
station for supplying power 
to new 928 (G+8) quarters at 
Basundara Township.
●	
Drawing scrutiny for the work 
"Pre-Engineered 
Turnkey 
Execution 
for 
Design, 
supply, 
erection, 
testing, 
commissioning, 
trial 
run 
with comprehensive annual 
maintenance during DLP of 5 
years for construction of HVAC 
with 
VRV/VRF 
system 
in 
Admin Block, Academic Block 
and Hostel Blocks of MINREM 
(MICM), Bhubaneswar".
●	
Drawing Scrutiny of Design, 
Drawing, FMC Quality Audit 
and Observance of PG Test 
for Pre-engineered Turnkey 
Execution for Design, Supply, 
Erection, 
Commissioning, 
Trial run, Testing with O&M 
during DLP etc. for Coal 
handling Plant (20 MTY) with 
SILO loading arrangement at 
Lakhanpur Area, MCL.
●	
Drawing Scrutiny of Design, 
Drawing, FMC Quality Audit 
and Observance of PG Test 
for 
“Construction 
of 
17.5 
MTY CHP on Pre-engineered 
Turnkey 
execution 
basis 
for design, supply, erection, 
commissioning, 
trial 
run, 
testing 
with 
O&M 
during 
DLP 
for 
coal 
evacuation 
arrangement (12.5 MTY) from 
Kulda 
Garjanbahal 
mines 
by 
pipe/trough 
conveyor 
to Sardega CHP (u/c) and 
construction of 5.0 MTY ATLS 
for road sale at integrated 
Kulda Garjanbahal OCP of 
Basundhara Area”, MCL.
9.6	
Energy Audit and Benchmarking
 
	
Annual Diesel Benchmarking for 
eighty five (85) nos. Opencast 
mines 
for 
the 
following 
subsidiaries by HQ, Ranchi. 
 
	
Head Quarter.
●	
11 OCPs of BCCL.
●	
28 OCPs+ CCL as a whole.


104
●	
08 OCPs of ECL.
●	
14 OCPs of WCL.
●	
10 OCPs of NCL.
●	
03 OCPs of SECL.
●	
11 OCPs of MCL.
 
	
Detail Diesel Benchmarking.
 
	
Head Quarter.
●	
Detail Diesel Benchmarking of 
01 OCP(Jayant) of NCL.
 
	
Regional Institute VI.
●	
Detail Diesel audit of Amlohri 
OCP.
●	
Detail 
Diesel 
audit 
of 
Dudhichua OCP.
 
	
Electrical 
Energy 
Audit 
& 
Benchmarking for.
 
	
Head Quarter.
●	
Urimari, 
Barkasayal 
Area, 
CCL.
●	
AAD OCM, Dhori Area, CCL.
●	
Sirka OC, CCL.
●	
Karma OC, CCL.
●	
Official complex of CMPDIL 
HQ as a part of MISSION 
GREEN.
 
	
Regional Institute II.
●	
AKWMC OCP of Katras area 
of BCCL.
●	
ADIC OCP of  Kusunda area 
of BCCL.
 
	
Regional Institute IV.
 
	
Electrical 
Energy 
Audit 
and 
Benchmarking.
●	
Naharia UG.
●	
Ballarpur Colliery 3&4.
●	
Gauri Pauni OC.
●	
DRC Mine.
●	
Nandgaon Mine.
●	
Bellora Naogaon Deep Mine.
●	
Kolgaon Ext Deep.
●	
Chatarpur Mine.
●	
Tawa Mine.
●	
Tawa II Mine.
●	
Common Unit.
●	
Silewara Workshop.
●	
Gauri Central OCM.
●	
Dhuptala OCM.
 
	
Regional Institute V.
●	
Energy 
Audit 
Report 
of 
Krishnashila OCP, NCL.
●	
Energy 
Audit 
Report 
of 
Nakrakonda Kumardihi B Mine 
, Bankola Area, ECL.
 
	
Illumination Survey.
 
	
Head Quarter.
●	
Illumination Survey of Jayant, 
OCP.
 
	
Regional Institute II.
●	
NTST Expansion Lodna area 
of BCCL.
●	
Dahibari OCP of CV area of 
BCCL.
 
	
Regional Institute VI.
●	
Illumination survey of Bina 
OCP.
●	
Illumination survey of Kari 
OCP.
●	
Illumination survey of Nigahi 
OCP(Revised).
 
	
Risk assessment and adequacy 
study. 
 
	
Regional Institute II.
●	
Lightning and earthing system 
of ABOCP Mine, Block II Area, 
BCCL.
 
	
Regional Institute V.
●	
Report 
preparation 
for 
‘Risk Assessment Study of 
Durgapur OCM , WCL.



	
105
●	
Report preparation for ‘Risk 
Assessment Study of Bhatadi 
OCM , WCL.
9.7	
Solar Initiatives.
 
	
Head Quarter.
●	
Under Feasibility/Planning.
	
117 MW J&K Area & Johilla 
Area, SECL.
	
4.68 MW Belgaria, BCCL.
	
6 MW Amlori, NCL.
	
6 MW Patherkheda, WCL.
	
62 MW various projects, MCL.
	
12.5 Sodepur, ECL.
	
0.2 MW Various Area, CCL.
	
62 MW- MCL.
●	
Under Tendering.
	
25 MW Dughda washery-II, 
BCCL.
●	
Under Contract Agreement.
	
13 MW Ground mounted SPP, 
NK Area,CCL.
●	
Commissioned.
	
1.02 MW SPP at Barkasayal 
Area, CCL.
	
1.3 MW- IWSS khadia,Bina 
Kakari NCL.
	
5 MW Bala kudra OB top 
Barka sayal, CCL.
 
	
Regional Institute I.
●	
Installation of Solar Tree (2 x 5 
KWp) at RI-1, Asansol.
 
	
Regional Institute III.
●	
PMC Services for 13 MW 
Solar Power Plant at NK Area.
●	
PMC Services for 5 MW Solar 
Power Plant at Barkasayal 
Area.
●	
PMC Services for 8.5 MW 
Solar Power Plant at B&K 
Area.
 
	
Regional Institute V.
●	
Design and drawing scrutiny 
of 1.5 MW Floating Solar 
Power Plant at Trench-1 of 
Sharda OCP, Sohagpur Area, 
SECL. This will be SECL’s first 
floating solar power plant.
●	
Drawing 
Scrutiny 
for 
5MW(AC)/6.75MWp(DC) 
Ground mounted solar power 
plant 
at 
Viveknagar 
site, 
Sohagpur Area SECL.
 
	
Regional Institute VII.
●	
Design, Engineering, Supply 
& Installation with testing, 
commissioning, etc of 10 MW 
(AC) /14 MWp (DC) Ground 
mounted Solar PV Power Plant 
at Kirarama village, Lakhanpur 
area of MCL.
●	
PMC 
service 
for 
Design, 
Engineering, 
Supply 
& 
Installation 
with 
testing, 
commissioning, etc of 25 MW 
(AC) Ground mounted Solar 
PV Plant for captive use in 
Orient area and Ib-Valley area 
of MCL.
●	
Design, Engineering, Supply 
& Installation with testing, 
commissioning, etc of 8 MW 
(AC) /11.2 MWp (DC) Floating 
Solar PV Power Plant on 
water body at Gandhi sagar, 
Balram OCP and mine sump, 
Bharatpur OCP of MCL". 
●	
Supply & Installation with 
testing, commissioning, etc 
of 5 MW (AC)/7 MWp (DC) 
capacity 
Floating 
Solar 
Power Plant on water body at 
Basundhara East OCP, MCL".
●	
Construction of 4 MW (AC)/ 5.6 
MWp (DC) capacity Ground 
mounted Solar Power Plant at 
Natraj UG Mine, Talcher Area


106
and HBI UG Mine, Orient Area 
of MCL". 
●	
PMC service for the work of 
25 MW (AC) Ground mounted 
Solar PV Plant for captive use 
in Samaleswari OCP,IB-Valley 
area of MCL.
●	
Design, Engineering, Supply 
& Installation with testing, 
commissioning and including 
WRA study for development of 
100 MW Wind Power Plant by 
MCL" at Kutrumali, Rayagada 
district, Odisha, MCL. 
●	
PMC service for the work of 
75 MW (AC) Ground mounted 
Solar PV Plant for captive use 
at Sardega Siding, Mahalaxmi 
Area, MCL.
9.8 	
Inspection Services.
●	 Pre-dispatch Inspection Services for 
plant & machinery purchased by all 
CIL subsidiaries at the Manufacturer’s 
Works.
●	 Revenue earned from the services by 
CMPDIL for the year 2025-26 including 
HQ & all RIs is Rs. 4.16 crores approx.
9.9 	
NDT (Non-destructive Testing) Jobs.
 
	
Head Quarter.
●	
NDT of HEMMs at various 
Projects of NCL. 
●	
NDT of CHPs. at various 
Projects of NCL. 
●	
NDT of HEMMs at various 
Projects of CCL. 
●	
Study of Safe workload and 
factor of safety test of 4x150 
Te. surface bunker, NDT of 
surface bunker & C1 belt 
conveyor & structural stability 
test of C-1 belt at Haldibari UG 
Mine, Hasdeo Area, SECL. 
●	
Study of Safe workload and 
factor of safety test of 2x100 
Te. surface bunker, 2×100 
Te. 
Surface 
Bunkers 
and 
Supporting 
Columns 
and 
NDT of 2×100 Te. Surface 
Bunkers 
and 
Supporting 
Columns to ensure safety 
and stability of structures and 
Other 
Critical 
Components 
of CHP at Pandavpara Mine, 
Baikunthpur Area, SECL. 
●	
Study 
of 
Safe 
workload 
and factor of safety test of 
2x40 Te.Surface bunker & 
Supporting columns & NDT 
of 2x40 Te. Surface bunker 
and Supporting columns to 
ensure safety and stability of 
structures and other critical 
components 
of 
CHP 
at 
Katkona Colliery Mine 1 & 2, 
Baikunthpur Area SECL.
●	
NDT of Man Riding Chairlift 
System at various mines of 
Nagpur 
Area, 
Chandrapur 
Area, 
Ballarpur 
Area 
& 
Pathakhera Area of WCL.
●	
NDT of CHPs at various 
mines of Chandrapur Area & 
Ballarpur Area of WCL.
●	
NDT of Haulage with Rope at 
Silewara Mine, Nagpur Area, 
WCL.
9.10 	
ISO Consultancy: 
 
	
Head Quarter.
●	
Post Certification Consultancy 
Work 
for 
ISO9001:2015-
ABMS for CMPDIL(HQ) and 
all it’s seven RIs.
●	
IMS post certification support 
work for ECL,CCL,NCL,MCL 
and WCL as and when required 
by Subsidiary company.
●	
ISO 
9001:2015-Quality



	
107
Management 
System(QMS) 
re-certification work completed 
for CMPDIL HQ and all RIs.
●	
Post Certification Consultancy 
Work for ISO37001:2016-Anti 
Bribery Management System 
(ABMS) for CMPDIL(HQ).
9.11	
Quality Audit Jobs:
 
	
Head Quarter.
●	
Third Party Quality Audit of 
Rajmahal CHP, ECL.
●	
Third Party Quality Audit of 
Jhanjra CHP, ECL.
●	
Third Party Quality Audit of 
Hurra-C CHP, ECL.
●	
Third Party Quality Audit of 
RGOC 3 CHP (5 MTY), SCCL.
 
	
Regional Institute I.
●	
Third Party Quality Audit of 
Kumardihi B CHP, Bankola 
Area.
 
	
Regional Institute IV.
●	
Dinesh OC CHP (08 Mty).
●	
Mungoli-Nirguda OC CHP (10 
Mty).
9.12	
Other Major Jobs.
 
	
Regional Institute V.
●	
The Raigarh Master Plan has 
been prepared to forecast the 
coal evacuation scenario in 
the Raigarh coalfields, along 
with the associated power 
supply system. 
●	
A pre-feasibility report on 
Green Hydrogen Project at 
J&K Area is submitted. 
9.13	
Outside consultancy Jobs.
 
	
Head Quarter.
●	
Preparation of Mining Plan 
& Mine Closure Plan and 
detailed project report (DPR) 
for Rabodih OPC coal mine 
located 
in 
Hazaribagh, 
Jharkhand.
●	
Mining Plan for Bhalumunda & 
Banai coal block alloted to JPL
 
	
Regional Institute VII.
●	
Preparation 
of 
e-Tender 
document and estimated cost 
for VK7 CHP at KGM area on 
EPC mode under SCCL.
●	
Providing consultancy services 
to SCCL for Design, supply, 
erection, 
commissioning 
and testing of 10 MTPA Coal 
handling plant at Naini OC, 
Odisha.
●	
e-Tender document for 10 
MTPA Conveyor Stream at 
PKOC CHP at MNG area on 
EPC mode under SCCL.
●	
Conducting feasibility study for 
Coal pipe conveyor for Talcher 
Thermal Stage-IV”, NTPC Ltd. 
Rs.2,16,77898.00.
●	
Feasibility & DPR for Pipe 
conveyor from CHP to Silo of 
MCL, Bharatpur, Talcher for 
M/s NALCO.
●	
Independent 
Engineer 
(IE) 
work for MDO job of Utkal 
D&E blocks, NALCO.
9.14	
New Initiatives:
 
	
Regional Institute III.
●	
Preparation of feasibility report 
for setting up Integrated Kulda-
Garjanbahal non-coking coal 
washery in MCL.
●	
Preparation 
of 
Feasibility 
Report 
for 
Bina-Kakri 
Deshaling Plant, NCL.


108
10.	
TOWN ENGINEERING SERVICES.
10.1  	 Department Overview.
	
The 
Town 
Engineering 
& 
Civil 
Maintenance 
(TE&CM) 
Department 
of CMPDIL (HQ) functions under the 
overall guidance of Director (Technical/
Engineering Services) and is headed 
by General Manager (TE&CM). The 
department plays a pivotal role in ensuring 
uninterrupted operation, maintenance, 
modernization and development of the 
physical infrastructure and utility services 
essential for the efficient functioning of 
CMPDIL Headquarters.
	
The 
department 
is 
responsible 
for 
comprehensive management of office and 
residential infrastructure, electrical and 
communication systems, water supply 
networks, environmental management 
initiatives and various support services. 
Through 
systematic 
planning 
and 
continuous 
monitoring, 
TE&CM 
has 
ensured a safe, functional and sustainable 
working environment for employees and 
stakeholders during FY 2025–26.
10.2 	
Infrastructure Management.
	
During the year, the department carried 
out 
extensive 
civil 
maintenance, 
renovation and repair works in office 
buildings, residential quarters and allied 
infrastructure. Regular preventive and 
corrective maintenance activities were 
undertaken to preserve structural integrity, 
improve functionality and enhance the 
overall aesthetics of the CMPDIL campus.
	
The department also ensured proper 
upkeep of roads, pathways, drainage 
systems, boundary walls and other 
civic infrastructure within the premises. 
Special attention was given to improving 
workplace ambience through horticulture 
development, 
landscaping 
and 
maintenance of green areas, thereby 
contributing towards a cleaner and 
healthier environment.
10.3	
Electrical & Mechanical Services.
	
TE&CM continued to maintain and 
operate critical electrical and mechanical 
installations 
including 
internal 
and 
external electrical distribution networks, 
substations, 
transformers, 
DG 
sets, 
UPS systems, HVAC installations and 
high-mast lighting systems. Continuous 
monitoring and preventive maintenance 
ensured reliable power supply and 
operational efficiency throughout the year.
	
The department also managed solar 
power generation facilities and promoted 
energy conservation measures to optimize 
electricity 
consumption 
and 
reduce 
operating costs. Regular inspections 
and maintenance of lifts, air-conditioning 
systems and associated equipment were 
undertaken to ensure safety, reliability 
and user comfort.
10.4 
Water 
Supply 
& 
Environmental 
Management.
	
The department successfully managed 
the water supply system catering to 
office 
buildings, 
residential 
colonies 
and other facilities. Regular operation 
and maintenance of pumps, pipelines, 
Water Treatment Plants (WTPs) ensured 
uninterrupted supply of potable water.
	
Environmental sustainability initiatives 
continued to receive due emphasis. 
Facilities such as the paper recycling 
plant and solid waste composter plant 
were maintained and operated effectively, 
supporting 
CMPDIL's 
commitment 
towards 
environmentally 
responsible 
operations and resource conservation.
10.5 	
Communication & Digital Support.
	
TE&CM maintained and coordinated 
various communication and information 
systems including BSNL services, CUG 
connections, 
FTTH 
networks, 
DTH 
services, CCTV surveillance systems, 
mobile 
communications, 
television



	
109
services and call centre facilities. The department also ensured smooth functioning of conference 
hall audio systems, video conferencing facilities and associated digital infrastructure, thereby 
supporting effective organizational communication and decision-making processes.
10.6 Statutory Compliance & Support Services.
	
The department coordinated with various statutory and service agencies including Municipal 
Corporation authorities, JBVNL, BSNL and other utility providers. Timely processing and 
submission of electricity bills, water charges, telephone bills, holding tax and other statutory 
payments were ensured throughout the year. Such proactive coordination facilitated 
uninterrupted utility services and compliance with regulatory requirements.
10.7 	
Financial Highlights.
	
During FY 2025–26, TE&CM successfully executed maintenance and development activities 
involving substantial expenditure under both revenue and capital heads.
	
Revenue Nature Works (Civil, Electrical & E&T): ₹1,346.29 Lakhs
	
Capital Nature Works (Civil, Electrical & E&T): ₹330.00 Lakhs
	
The expenditure reflects the department's sustained efforts towards maintaining critical 
infrastructure, improving service delivery and supporting the long-term development objectives 
of CMPDIL Headquarters.
	
Moreover, the Town Engineering & Civil Maintenance Department remained committed 
to providing reliable infrastructure, efficient utility services and comprehensive engineering 
support throughout FY 2025–26. Through effective planning, timely execution of maintenance 
activities and implementation of sustainability-oriented initiatives, the department contributed 
significantly towards enhancing operational efficiency, employee welfare and institutional 
growth. The department shall continue its efforts towards modernization of infrastructure, 
energy efficiency, environmental sustainability and improved service delivery in alignment with 
the organizational objectives of CMPDIL and Coal India Limited.
11.	
RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS.
11.1	
S&T Projects funded by Ministry of Coal.
	
The Research & Development (R&D) activities in coal sector is administered through an 
Apex Body namely, Standing Scientific Research Committee (SSRC) with Secretary (Coal) 
as its Chairman. The other members of this Apex Body include Chairman of Coal India 
Limited (CIL), CMDs of Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Limited (CMPDIL), Singreni 
Collieries Company Limited (SCCL) and Neyveli Lignite Corporation India Limited (NLCIL), 
Director General (DG) of Directorate General of Mines Safety (DGMS), Director General of 
Council of Scientific & Industrial Research (CSIR), representative from Department of Science 
& Technology, Adviser Energy, NITI Aayog, Director, CIMFR, Dhanbad, Director, TERI & 
Chairman of the Technical Sub-committee of SSRC. The main functions of SSRC are to plan 
budget, identification of thrust areas for coal and lignite sectors, approve new research projects, 
oversee the outcomes of the completed projects and their replication in actual field condition. 
	
The SSRC is assisted by a Technical sub-committee headed by HoD (Mining) IIT-KGP/IIT-
ISM/IIT-BHU on annual rotation basis. The sub-committee deals with new research proposals 
related to advanced technology/methodology for improvement of production & productivity from


110
underground mining and open cast mining, improvement of safety, health and environment, 
waste to wealth, alternative use of coal and clean coal technologies, coal beneficiation and 
utilization, exploration, innovation and indigenization (Under Make-in-India Concept), etc.
	
CMPDIL acts as the Nodal Agency for co-ordination of research activities in the coal sector, 
which involves identification of Thrust Areas for research activities, identification of agencies 
which can take up the research work in the identified fields, scrutiny and processing the 
proposals for Government approval, preparation of budget estimates for research activities, 
disbursement of fund to implementing agencies based on the progress of the project and 
monitoring the progress of the projects, etc.
Total no. of S&T projects taken up (till 31.03.2026)       
433 nos.
Total no. of S&T projects completed (till 31.03.2026)     
351 nos.
 Physical and financial performance during FY 2025-26
a. Physical performance 
	The status of Coal S&T projects during FY 2025-26 is as follows (Details in Annexure-A): 
Projects on-going as on 01.04.2025
-
19
Projects approved by SSRC during 2025-26
-
08
Projects completed during 2025-26
-
06* 
Projects on-going as on 31.03.2026
-
21
* subject to acceptance of project completion by TSC
b. Financial performance: 
Budget provisions and actual expenditure are shown below:                                                                              
(Rs. in Crore)
2024-25
2025-26 (as on 31.3.2026)
RE
Fund received from MoC
Actual
RE
Fund received from MoC
Actual (Prov.)
20.00
20.00
20.00
20.00
20.00
19.9981
Annexure-A
Name of S&T Projects funded by Ministry of Coal approved during 2025-26
S. 
No.
Name of the project
Implementing agencies
Approved cost        
(Rs. in lakh)
1.
Coal to Chemical Sensors: Conversion 
of low-grade coal to carbon dots-
based smart sensing strips for onsite 
monitoring of heavy metals in water 
bodies around the coalfields
SVNIT Surat, NIT, Jamshedpur 
and BCCL Dhanbad.
    53.21



	
111
S. 
No.
Name of the project
Implementing agencies
Approved cost        
(Rs. in lakh)
2.
Development 
of 
Value-Added 
Abrasion Resistant Ceramic Tiles and 
Insulation Refractories using Coal 
Mine Overburden
Government 
College 
of 
Engineering 
and 
Ceramic 
Technology(GCECT), 
Kolkata, 
SCCL, Kothagudem and ECL, 
Sanctoria
  111.67 
3.
CO2 
Methanation 
over 
Green 
Bifunctional 
Metallic 
Catalyst 
to 
maximize the CH4 production with 
stability.
SRM-IST, 
Ghaziabad, 
and 
CIMFR, Dhanbad  
  90.27
4.
An AI Enabled Platform for Diagnosis, 
Prognosis and Health Management 
of Mining Electrical Systems: A Case 
Study on the Dragline
IIT Kharagpur, and NCL, Singrauli.
340.38
5.
Design and development of low cost 
indigenous imaging RADAR system 
for automatic slope monitoring and 
failure prediction in opencast coal 
mines
NIT Rourkela, CMPDIL Ranchi, 
IIT Kharagpur, VIT Vellore, and 
MCL, Sambhalpur.
361.46
6.
Indigenous Development of Intelligent 
Monitoring and Control System for 
Ventilation and Fire Detection in 
Underground Coal Mines
Indian Institute of Technology, 
Ropar, 
National 
Centre 
for 
Coal 
and 
Energy 
Research 
(NaCCER), IIT, Kharagpur, IIT, 
Delhi, Ingenisys Integrations LLP, 
Kolkata and ECL
398.13
7.
Indigenous 
Development 
of 
Hand-held 
Multigas 
Detector 
for 
underground coal mining for real time 
monitoring
IIT (ISM), Dhanbad, National 
Centre for Coal and Energy 
Research (NaCCER), Ranchi, 
Uniphos Envirotronic Pvt Ltd, 
Valsad, BCCL, Dhanbad and 
Symbica Pvt Ltd., Guwahati
339.85
8.
Direct Air Capture (DAC) of GHGs.
CED, CMPDIL, Ranchi, NaCCER, 
UrjanovaC Pvt Ltd, Mumbai and 
ECL, Sanctoria.
531.00
Name of S&T Projects funded by Ministry of Coal (MoC) completed during 2025-26
Sl. No.
Name of the project
Implementing agencies
Approved  cost 
(Rs. in lakh)
1.
Assessing the Abiotic and Biot-
ic Factors in Pit Lakes for Sus-
tainable Management of
BIT, Mesra, CMPDIL, Ranchi, CCL, 
Ranchi and MCL, Sambalpur
208.58
2.
Indigenous Development of 
NIR spectroscope for instant 
prediction of Coal Quality Pa-
rameters 
Shri 
Ramdeobaba 
College 
of 
Engineering & Management (RCOEM), 
Nagpur, CIMFR, Nagpur and SCCL, 
Kothagudem
110.75


112
Sl. No.
Name of the project
Implementing agencies
Approved  cost 
(Rs. in lakh)
3.
Development 
of 
Synthetic 
Lightweight 
Aggregates 
as 
Backfilling Material using Hy-
draulic Stowing Method
IIT (ISM), Dhanbad
36.47
4.
Use of Microseismicity as a tool 
for underground mines hazard 
monitoring with the motive to 
enhance safety and production
 IIT, Kharagpur, CMPDIL, Ranchi & 
ECL, Sanctoria
199.78
5.
Recycling Coal Mine Overbur-
den To Reuse As A Value Add-
ed Building Material To Pro-
mote A Circular Economy
Jawaharlal Nehru Aluminum Research 
Development 
and 
Design 
Centre 
(JNARDDC), Nagpur, BIT, Mesra, 
Visvesvaraya National Institute of 
Technology Nagpur (VNIT), Nagpur, 
and CMPDIL, Ranchi
285.92
6.
 Establishment of Geo-ther-
mal energy (20KW Cap) pow-
er generation Pilot Project at 
Manuguru area of SCCL Com-
mand area based on closed 
loop Binary Organic Rankine 
Cycle Process technology
SCCL, Kothagudem and Shriram 
Institute of Industrial Research (SIIR), 
New Delhi
236.51
11.2	
R&D Projects funded by Coal India Limited (CIL)
• 
For in-house R&D work of CIL, there is an R&D Board headed by Chairman, CIL. The R&D Board 
is assisted by an Apex Committee headed by Director (Technical), CIL. CMPDIL acts as the Nodal 
Agency for preparation of budget estimates for research activities, evaluation of new project 
proposals, disbursement of fund to implementing agencies based on the progress of the project, 
monitoring the progress of the projects till their completion and dissemination of the research 
findings, etc. 
• 
To enhance R&D base in command areas of CIL, CIL Board in its meeting held on 24th March 2008 
has delegated substantial powers to R&D Board of CIL and also to the Apex Committee of the R&D 
Board. A new R&D guideline of CIL has been formulated and approved by CIL Board in its 488th 
Board meeting The Apex Committee is empowered to sanction individual R&D projects up to ₹5.0 
Crore value with a limit of ₹50.0 Crore per annum considering all the projects together, whereas the 
CIL, R&D Board is empowered to sanction individual R&D projects up to ₹75.0 Crore with a limit of 
₹500.0 Crore per annum considering all the projects together.
 Total no. of R&D projects taken up (till 31.03.2025)               132 nos.
 Total no. of R&D projects completed (till 31.03.2025)             95 nos.
•	
Physical and financial performance during 2025-26:



	
113
a. 	
Physical performance:
The status of CIL R&D Projects during 2025-26 are as follows (Details in Annexure-B):
Sl. No.
Parameters
Quantity
1
Projects on-going as on 01.04.2025
19
2
Projects approved during 2025-26
08
3
Projects completed during 2025-26
07
4
Projects on-going as on 31.03.2026
20
b. 	
Financial performance:
Budget provisions vis-à-vis actual fund disbursement during the period are given below:
(Rs. in Crores)
2024-25
2025-26 (as on 31.3.2026)
RE
Actual
BE
Actual 
166.75
245.39
250
33.12
Annexure-B
R&D Projects funded by CIL approved during 2025-26
Sl. 
No.
Name of the Project
Implementing agencies
Approved cost        
(Rs. In lakh)
1.
Carbon electrode based indigenous low-
cost perovskite solar cells development.
IIT, 
Roorkee, 
NaCCER, 
CMPDIL, HQ, Ranchi.
492.05
2.
Development of an Indigenous Optical 
Fiber Based Instrument for Measuring In-
The-Hole Velocity of Detonation (VOD) and 
Analyze the Performance of Explosives & 
Accessories in Field Condition (Phase-II, 
TRL 5 to 8/9).
NaCCER, CMPDIL, Ranchi, 
Blasting Division, CMPDIL 
HQ, Ranchi, and Regional 
Institute – VI, CMPDIL, 
Singrauli.
282.3
3.
Indigenous Development of IoT-Enabled 
Technology for Monitoring, Analysis and 
Interpretation of Longwall Shield Pressures 
for Improving Safety and Productivity 
(Phase-II, TRL 5 to 8).
NaCCER, CMPDIL, Ranchi, 
IIT, Kharagpur, and ECL 
Sanctoria.
337.06
4.
Automation, 
Control 
& 
Wireless 
Communication in Underground Mines on 
4GLTE/5G ready Communication Network 
in Jhanjhra Mines, ECL.
ITI, 
Lucknow, 
NaCCER, 
CMPDIL, Ranchi, and ME 
deptt, CMPDIL, Ranchi.
2184.91
5.
A Pilot Project on Underground Coal 
Gasification (UCG) to establish technology 
in Indian geo-mining conditions.-Phase-2.
Clean 
Energy 
Deptt., 
CMPDIL (HQ), Ranchi, M/s 
Ergo Exergy Technologies 
Inc (EETI), Canada and 
ECL, Sanctoria.
4839.32


114
Sl. 
No.
Name of the Project
Implementing agencies
Approved cost        
(Rs. In lakh)
6.
Sustainable Solutions for Removal of 
Fluoride from Groundwater in Mining Area 
of Col India Ltd in Jharkhand, Odisha and 
West Bengal for Safe Drinking Water. 
Phase-1.
CSIR, 
Bhubaneswar 
& 
Reseapro 
Labs 
Pvt. 
Ltd, 
RI-VII, 
CMPDIL, 
Bhubaneshwar; and RI-III, 
CMPDIL Ranchi.
1291.06
7.
Non Invasive Health Screening and Smart 
Monitoring Systems for Coal Miners’ Sarety 
and well Being.
IIEST, 
Shibpur 
& 
ECL, 
Sanctoria.
470.57
8.
Development of Innovative Extraction 
Method for Safer Extraction of coal Seam 
by Underground Method with higher 
productivity and percentage of Extraction 
using Continuous Mining System.
IIT(ISM), 
Dhanbad 
, 
NaCCER; ECL.
160.48
R&D Projects funded by CIL completed during 2025-26
Sl. No.
Name of the Project
Implementing agencies
Approved cost    
(Rs. lakh)
1.
Real-time energy efficient cyber-physical 
intelligent system for mine slope health 
monitoring.
IIT-ISM, Dhanbad, CMPDIL, 
Ranchi & ECL, Sanctoria.
263.75
2.
Indigenous Development of Monolithic 
Perovskite 
Module 
Manufacturing 
by 
Printing.
IIT, Bombay, CIL, Kolkata, 
Mine Electronics Division, 
CMPDIL, Ranchi.
1317.62
3.
A Pilot Project on Underground Coal 
Gasification 
(UCG) 
to 
establish 
the 
technology in Indian geo-mining conditions-
(Phase-1).
CED, CMPDIL Ranchi, M/s 
Ergo Exergy Technologies 
Inc (EETI), Canada and 
ECL, Sanctoria.
2466.37
4.
Development of guidelines for delineation 
of water-stressed areas and designing 
of environmental friendly water storage 
structure for meeting the water needs in 
mining areas.
IIT-ISM, 
Dhanbad, 
CCL, 
Ranchi.
107.84
5.
Up gradation of high ash Indian coal through 
physical and chemical beneficiation.
IIT, 
Kharagpur, 
CMP 
Division, CMPDIL, Ranchi, 
MCL, Sambhalpur, BCCL, 
Dhanbad and CCL, Ranchi.
144.3
6.
Development of guideline for prevention 
& mitigation of explosion hazard by 
risk assessment and determination of 
explosibility of Indian coal incorporating risk 
based mine emergency evacuation and re-
entry protocol.
CIMFR, Dhanbad; IIT-ISM, 
Dhanbad, S&R Division, CIL 
(HQ), Kolkata & SIMTARS, 
Australia.
2413.21
7.
Assessment of safe parting thickness and 
optimal goaf edge support requirement for 
extraction of pillars under soft cover.
IIT (BHU), Varanasi, ECL; 
CCL and SECL.
182.29



	
115
12.	
BLASTING
	
CMPDIL 
has 
developed 
technical 
expertise and capabilities to render 
value added services in the field of 
controlled blasting and vibration study, 
testing of explosives and accessories, 
fragmentation 
assessment 
and 
improvement study for gainful utilization 
of HEMM. Blasting Division of CMPDIL is 
equipped with the state-of-art equipment 
viz. High Speed Camera, Data Trap-II 
Micro Trap-II, Handi Trap-II for in-the-
hole VOD measurement, fragmentation, 
assessment 
and 
measurement 
by 
WipFrag software, Blast simulation by JK 
Simblast and Digital VOD Meter for VOD 
measurement of explosive in unconfined 
condition.
	
Technical services rendered to different 
subsidiaries of Coal India Limited & 
outside agencies during 2025-26:
12.1	 Jobs Within CIL Subsidiaries
	
a.	
Random sampling and testing 
of Explosives (Bulk Explosives, 
Non Permitted Large Diameter 
(NPLD) 
& 
Permitted 
Small 
Diameter Explosives (PSD)) & 
Accessories (Nonel, Detonating 
Fuse, MS connector, Cord Relay, 
PETN Cast Booster, Emulsion 
Cast 
Booster, 
Electronic 
Detonator & PED Detonator) 
throughout the year:
•	
BCCL, CCL, & NEC - tested by 
Blasting Division of CMPDIL (HQ) - 
Monthly Reports.
•	
ECL - tested by Blasting cell of 
CMPDIL (HQ) & RI-I, CMPDIL - 
Monthly Reports.
•	
WCL - tested by Blasting cell of RI-
IV, CMPDIL - Monthly Reports.
•	
SECL - tested by Blasting cell of RI-
V, CMPDIL - Monthly Reports.
•	
NCL - tested by Blasting cell of RI-
VI, CMPDIL - Monthly Reports.
•	
MCL - tested by Blasting cell of RI-
VII, CMPDIL - Monthly Reports.
	
b.	
Determination of Bench Mark 
Powder Factor (BMPF).
•	
Blasting Division of CMPDIL (HQ): - 
12 Reports.
•	
Blasting cell of RI-I, CMPDIL: - 3 
Reports.
•	
Blasting cell of RI-IV, CMPDIL: - 3 
Reports.
•	
Blasting cell of RI-VI, CMPDIL: - 1 
Report.
 
c. 
Scientific study for controlled 
blasting & vibration study.
•	
Blasting Division of CMPDIL (HQ): - 
10 Reports.
•	
Blasting cell of RI-V, CMPDIL: - 6 
Reports.
•	
Blasting cell of RI-VI, CMPDIL: - 2 
Report.
•	
Blasting cell of RI-VII, CMPDIL: - 2 
Reports.
	
d.	
Regular Monitoring of vibration 
study.
•	
Blasting Division of CMPDIL (HQ): - 
1 Mine.
 
e. 
Scientific 
study 
for 
use 
of 
Locking Cap/ Stem Plugs during 
operation in mines of NCL- 1 
Report.
12.2	
Out-Side Consultancy Job done by 
Blasting Division of CMPDIL (HQ)
a.	
Quarterly Performance evaluation of 
explosives & accessories supplied 
by various manufacturers to the 
mines of NLC India Limited – 3 
Reports.


116
b.	
Quarterly Performance evaluation of 
explosives & accessories supplied 
by various manufacturers to the 
mines of Talabira II & III mines of 
NLC India Limited – 3 Reports.
c.	
Quarterly Periodical Random testing 
of permitted Explosives (P1&P5) 
& Detonators and LDC explosives 
and accessories used for blasting in 
coal at underground and opencast 
projects of SCCL for a period of 2 
years. - 4 Reports.
d.	
Performance evaluation of new 
Explosives & Accessories: - 9 
Reports.
12.3 	 Special Jobs done by Blasting Division 
of CMPDIL (HQ)
a. 	 Developing a Scientific Methodology 
for determination of Benchmark 
Powder Factor based on improved 
methodology in the mines of Coal 
India Limited.
b. 	 Updation 
of 
SOP 
regarding 
of 
enlistment 
of 
explosive 
manufacturers in CIL approved 
product list of explosives and 
accessories.
c. 	 Technical support/vetting of reports 
for RI’s/CIL.
13.	
LABORATORY SERVICES
13.1 	 Chemical Laboratory
The Chemical Lab is equipped with 
conventional 
and 
sophisticated 
equipment(s) 
like 
Thermogravimetric 
Analyser for proximate analysis of coal/
coke/lignite, automatic Bomb Calorimeter 
for determination of gross calorific value 
of coal & lignite, CHNS apparatus for 
determination 
of Carbon, Hydrogen, 
Nitrogen & Sulphur, AFTR instrument 
for Ash fusion temperature range (IDT, 
ST, HT & FT) of coal,   Instruments  such 
as 
Swelling 
Index,LTGK,Plastometer 
for determination of plasticity of coal 
and other equipments are availaible for 
determining  coking properties of coal.
	
In 
addition, 
the 
laboratory 
has 
recently been equipped with an X-Ray 
Diffractometer 
(XRD) 
system 
for 
identifying mineral phases in both coal 
and non-coal samples, and an X-Ray 
Fluorescence 
(XRF) 
instrument 
for 
determining elements in oxide form in 
coal ash. The laboratory has successfully 
establishing 
an 
ICP-MS 
(Inductively 
Coupled Plasma – Mass Spectrometry) 
facility for the qualitative and quantitative 
analysis of rare earth elements (REE) and 
trace metals in various under exploration 
Blocks of CIL, MoC etc.
13.2 	 Coal Petrography Lab
The 
Petrography 
Lab 
carries 
out 
petrographic 
analysis 
such 
as 
determination of maceral composition, 
random reflectance (RoR %) and mean 
maximum reflectance % (MMR %). This 
study is done to determine the coal-type 
and coal rank of the samples. This study 
is also useful for source rock evaluation 
for hydrocarbons, oil shales, coal bed 
methane and shale gas assessment.
The petrography lab is equipped with 
Advance Petrological Microscopes for 
carrying out Petrographic studies in 
which the maceral content (Coal type) 
and 
reflectance 
percentage 
(Rank/
Maturity) of coal samples are determined. 
Petrographic studies are imperative for 
ascertaining the suitability of given coal 
as blends in coke making. Abrasive 
cutting machine and Hot mounting 
press for preparation of coal pellets for 
Petrographic studies and cleat study are 
also available.



	
117
13.3 	 Jobs Carried Out in CMP Labora-
tory
	
CMP Laboratory is engaged in washability 
analysis (including Proximate Analysis, 
GCV, HGI, Caking Properties etc.) for both 
coking and non-coking coal samples of 
different coalfields as per job requirement. 
These analyses are carried out for bore 
core coal samples and RoM coal. The 
number of coal samples whose analysis 
has been carried out during 2025-26.
a)	 RoM Coal Samples – 03 nos. samples
b)	 Quality parameters of coal samples- 
02 nos. of samples
13.4	 Jobs of MT Lab
S. N.
Job Description
Sta-
tus
Quantity/
No.
1.
Physico - mechanical 
properties testing of 
Rock/Coal.
COMPLETED
5054 m
2.
RMR/RMR with Support 
Design/Cavability Index 
Study/SCAMP Study
18 no.
14.	
ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES 
14.1 EIA / EMPs for CIL PROJECTS
During the year 2025-26, Environment 
Department prepared a total of 46 nos. of 
Form-1 (including Form III, IV & VI) and 
21 nos. of Draft EMPs/Addendum EMPs. 
A total 67 nos. of reports were prepared.
14.2	 Outside Projects
During the year 2025-26, Environment 
Department prepared:
•	
Sand replenishment study report 
for 5 rivers of Bihar for Bihar State 
Government
•	
Sand replenishment study report for 
18 ghats of Rajasthan for Rajasthan 
State Government
•	
Third Party Mine Closure Audit for 
Pakri Barwadih OCP, M/s NTPC
•	
Third Party Mine Closure Audit for 
Pakri Barjora (N) OCP, M/s WBPDCL
•	
Temporary 
Mine 
Closure 
Plan 
(TMCP) of Chotia – I & II OCP, M/s 
BALCO
14.3	 Environmental Monitoring of Air, 
Water, and Noise
The Ministry of Environment, Forests 
& Climatic Change (MoEF&CC) grants 
Environmental Clearance (EC) to mining 
projects on the condition that Routine 
Environmental 
Monitoring 
(REM) 
is 
conducted. This monitoring is essential 
to verify the effectiveness of the pollution 
control measures implemented at the 
project sites and to ensure adherence to 
the stipulated EC conditions during the 
operational phase of the mines.
During 
the 
financial 
year 
2025-26, 
environmental monitoring of 303 projects/
clusters/establishments of CIL (ECL-16, 
BCCL-17, CCL-74, WCL-75, SECL-78, 
NCL-13, and MCL-30) was carried out 
through eight environmental laboratories 
located at Asansol, Dhanbad, Nagpur, 
Bilaspur, Bhubaneswar, Hasdeo, Jayant, 
and Ranchi.
Total Samples Collected & Analyzed 
during the financial year 2025-26: Air 
:1,75,668 Nos, Noise: 28,127 Nos + 338 
Nos (Day & Night + Day Only) & Water: 
28,839 Nos.


118
Sample Analysis: A View of Environment Lab ,CMPDIL 
(HQ), Ranchi
14.4	 Accreditation to CMPDIL as EIA 
Consulting Organisation
CMPDIL 
is 
accredited 
as 
an 
EIA 
Accredited 
Consultant 
Organization 
(ACO) by the Quality Council of India 
(A ministry of Environment & Forest’s 
designated Agency) for sectors Mining 
of Minerals including the Opencast/
Underground 
mining 
sector, 
Coal 
Washeries sector, Offshore and Onshore 
Oil and Gas exploration, development 
and production and Mineral Beneficiation 
Sectors. CMPDIL is the largest Accredited 
Consultant Organization (ACO) in India 
for preparation of EIA & EMP and having 
more than 100 nos. of approved experts 
to its credit.
 14.5	 Accreditation of CMPDIL Environ-
mental Laboratory 
The 
Environmental 
Laboratory 
at 
CMPDIL (HQ), Ranchi was re-accredited 
by the National Accreditation Board 
for Testing & Calibration Laboratories 
(NABL) in accordance with the ISO/
IEC 17025:2017 standards for 170 
parameters. This accreditation remains in 
effect until 24th March 2029. The lab also 
holds accreditation as per  Occupational 
Health and Safety Management System 
(OHSMS) IS/ISO 45001:2018 and is valid 
till 10.07.2028.
Similarly, the Environment Laboratories 
of RI-I, Asansol, RI-II, Dhanbad, RI-IV, 
Nagpur, RI-V, Bilaspur, RI-VI, Singrauli 
and RI-VII, Bhubaneswar also hold 
NABL accreditation under the ISO/IEC 
17025:2017 standards. 
Environment Laboratory CMPDIL(HQ) 
has successfully completed the NABL 
on Site Surveillance Audit in accordance 
with ISO/IEC 17025:2017 standards 
on 21.02.2026. The Accreditation was 
continued as per the guidelines of NABL 
and ISO 17025:2017 after successful 
completion of the audit.



	
119
14.6 	 Appraisal of Project Reports for 
Coal Mining Projects
	
A total of 27 nos. of project reports, DPR, 
CR & RPR for coal mining projects have 
been appraised by Environment Division 
during the financial year.
14.7 Sustainable Development Cell 
	
CMPDIL has prepared the following 
reports, as per direction of SDC of MoC:
•	
Comprehensive 
Study 
Report 
on 
Mine Water Utilisation for Active and 
Abandoned Mine Voids of CIL. The 
landmark report—highly commended by 
the Ministry of Coal—identified 22 pilot 
project sites across six states for large-
scale mine water treatment and utilisation. 
These initiatives support applications 
in irrigation, potable supply, and bottled 
water, contributing significantly to India’s 
commitments under the UN Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs) on Clean 
Water, Sanitation, and Climate Action.
	
Model DPRs for rejuvenation of water 
bodies for 4 subsidiaries i.e., CCL, WCL, 
SECL & MCL - CMPDIL Team visited Kujju 
Area, CCL for site inspections of traditional 
waterbodiers near the coal mining sites 
for preparing DPR for rejuvenation of 
water bodies, enhancing quality and 
quantity, enriching aquatic ecosystem 
and generating aesthetic and livelihood 
opportunities for local communities


120
	
Assessment 
Report 
(Draft) 
of 
effectiveness of Eco-Parks developed by 
CIL.
14.8	 Special Studies 
•	
Soil Moisture Conservation Study of 
Balram Expansion OCP, MCL.
•	
Green House Gas (GHG) emission 
study report for 12 nos. projects 
was submitted as part of EIA & EMP 
Report.
•	
Carbon 
Assesment 
study 
of 
Amarpali 
OCP(CCL), 
Ghonsa 
OCP(WCL), Kulda OCP(MCL) and 
Dipka OCP(SECL).
•	
Carbon Sequestration Study Report 
of entire MCL was submitted.
•	
Carrying Capacity Study Report 
of 
Riverine 
Ecosystem 
for 
Amalgamated 
Gauri-Pauni 
OCP,WCL submitted.
•	
296 nos. of Mine Closure Plan 
covering Community Development 
& Livelihood Plan (CDLP) have been 
prepared by Environment Dvision in 
the year.
•	
Assessment of Carbon Emission 
Intensity for MCL.
•	
Environment 
Compliance 
Audit 
Report  of NTPC, Pakri Barwadih 
Coal Mining Project: 
	
The Environment Division, CMPDIL 
(HQ), 
Ranchi 
has 
successfully 
completed and submitted the Third 
Party 
Environment 
Compliance 
Audit for the Pakri-Barwadih Coal 
Mining Project (PBCMP) of NTPC 
Mining Limited, Jharkhand.
	
The audit was conducted in line 
with the provisions of MPG-25 (Para 
3.3 & 2.8) and as per the Office 
Memorandum issued by the Ministry 
of Coal, Government of India (Dtd. 
31.01.2025). The team undertook 
a 
comprehensive 
assessment 
by 
collecting 
and 
evaluating 
field 
evidence 
and 
relevant 
documentation for the period 2020–
21 to 2024–25.
•	
A pioneering project “GHG Estimation 
from Abandoned Wells and Coal Mines”, 
in collaboration with IIT (ISM), Dhanbad 
was awarded by MoEF&CC under Global 
Environment Facility (GEF) under CBIT 
for preparation of Biennial Transparency 
Reports (BTR-2 and BTR-3) to be 
submitted to UNFCCC. This is a first of a 
kind project being undertaken by CMPDIL.



	
121
14.9	 Capacity Building Training
Environment 
Division, 
CMPDIL 
had 
organized 
the 
following 
capacity 
building training during the year:-
•	
3 
days 
training 
on 
Ecology 
& 
Biodiversity was arranged for 20 nos. 
of CMPDIL experts from 23.04.2025 
to 25.04.2025 at Bandhavgarh Tiger 
Reserve, Madhya Pradesh
•	
An Interative workshop of officals from 
CMPDIL, CIL and its subsidiaries on 
improvement 
in 
Submission 
of 
EC 
Proposals at 03.01.2026 at CMPDIL, 
Ranchi. Member Secretary, EAC (Coal 
Mining), MoEF&CC was guest faculty in 
the workshop - Central Mine Planning 
& Design Institute Limited organized an 
interactive workshop on "Improvement 
in Submission of EC Proposals" at 
Koel Hall, CMPDIL (HQ), Ranchi, on 
3rd January, 2026. Coal India Limited 
(CIL), its subsidiaries, and CMPDIL's 
Regional Institutes participated in this 
workshop. The event aimed to strengthen 
coordination among CMPDIL, CIL and 
its subsidiaries, and MoEF&CC, and 
to facilitate more robust, compliant 
and efficient EC proposals in line with 
prevailing environmental framework


122
•	
An Interative workshop on MoEF&CC 
funded “GHG Estimation from Abandoned 
Wells and Coal Mines” on 14.02.2026 
at CMPDIL, Ranchi - Central Mine 
Planning & Design Institute Limited 
(CMPDIL), in association with Indian 
Institute of Technology (ISM), Dhanbad, 
has undertaken a study on “Assessing 
Fugitive Emissions from Coal Mines & 
Fuel Transformation for BTR-2 and BTR-
3.” CMPDIL successfully hosted a one-
day interactive workshop on “Assessing 
Fugitive Emissions from Coal Mines & 
Fuel Transformation” on 14th February 
2026 at CMPDIL, Ranchi, bringing 
together 
experts 
and 
stakeholders 
to deliberate on methodologies and 
approaches for greenhouse gas (GHG) 
emission estimation.
14.10 	Environment Related Programs
A.	
Celebration of World Environment 
Day 
World Environment Day 2025 was 
commemorated on 5th June 2025 at 
Headquarter and all Regional Institutes 
(RIs) of CMPDIL aligning with the global 
theme of "Beat Plastic Pollution”.
Leading up to this global observance, 
CMPDIL hosted a diverse array of 
campaigns and competitive events, such 
as the organizing tree planting initiatives, 
poster-making 
contests, 
quizzes, 
seminars, and essay competitions in 
Headquarter and across all RIs. These 
initiatives aimed to foster a culture of 
sustainability and encourage proactive 
participation 
in 
land 
management 
practices.



	
123


124
B.	
Vriksharopan Abhiyan’2025 & Ek 
Ped Maa Ke Naam Campaign 
	
CMPDIL 
celebrated 
the 
even 
with 
its plantation drive across its Ranchi 
headquarters and seven regional institutes 
located in six states.The plantation drive 
commenced with the participation of its 
esteemed Directors, Regional Directors, 
Head of Departments, other Dignitaries, 
and its employees.
A total of 1200 saplings, encompassing 
fruit-bearing and medicinal species, were 
planted at CMPDIL's headquarters and 
regional institutes. Significantly, 1000 of 
these saplings were distributed to local 
communities, school children, security 
personnel and others.



	
125
15.	
INFORMATION & COMMUNICATION 
TECHNOLOGY.
In addition to providing in-house support, 
ICT Division of CMPDIL has been 
extending consultancy services to MoC, 
CIL and its Subsidiaries. Major jobs done 
during Financial Year 2025-26 have been 
outlined below:
15.1	
Centralized software developed and 
maintained by ICT Division, CMPDIL 
for MoC and entire CIL: 
•	
Exploration module of Single Window 
Clearance System (SWCS) for MoC 
– to streamline the online approval 
process for Exploration Proposals and 
Geological Reports
•	
Contract Labour Information Portal 
(CLIP). 
•	
On-Line 
Human 
Resource 
Management 
System 
(HRMS) 
including PRIDE/PAR.
•	
Vigilance Clearance System/Vigilance 
Monitoring System.


126
•	
Annual Property Return (APR) and 
Property Intimation and Property 
Sanction (PIPS) portal for executives.
•	
Bank Card Rate System – invites 
interest rate quotation from banks for 
placement of companies’ FDs.
•	
Underground and Opencast Mine 
Capacity Assessment.
•	
Online Coal Block Information System.
•	
Mine 
Data 
Management 
System 
Portal (MDMS) for projects being 
monitored by MoC.  This includes 1 
BT Plan, Environmental Clearance 
(EC), 
Forest 
Clearance 
(FC), 
Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation & 
Resettlement (R&R) and creation of 
Sustainable Development Cell (SDC) 
schemes.
•	
A clone for PARIVESH portal on EC/
FC vetting with respect to the forms 
1,2,3,4,5 and EIA/EMP for vetting 
by the peers (Regional Institutes 
of 
CMPDIL), 
CIL 
& 
respective 
subsidiaries of the projects.
•	
 A dashboard, National Coal Portal for 
MOC.
•	
NIRMAN 
(Noble 
Initiative 
for 
Rewarding 
Mains 
Aspirants 
of 
National Civil Service Examination) 
portal as part of CIL’s CSR activities
•	
CMPDIL is providing support for 
e-Office application for entire Coal 
India Limited.
15.2	
Web portals developed for CMPDIL
•	
A portal for uploading of invoices 
from CMPDIL HQ and RIs has been 
developed 
which 
facilitates 
our 
client CIL subsidiaries to download 
the invoices and quickly process 
them. This will minimize the delay in 
payments of invoices to CMPDIL.
•	
For real time monitoring of tasks 
/ action points, a CMD CMPDIL 
dashboard has been developed.
•	
Colony 
complaint 
management 
system for CMPDIL – Online facility for 
end to end tracking and management 
of complaints related to maintenance 
of quarters in CMPDIL colonies.
•	
Online Quarter Allotment System for 
CMPDIL 
•	
RASTEA – To monitor explosive stocks 
in magazines across subsidiaries 
•	
Hackathon – A portal developed to 
invite solutions for problem statement 
published by CMPDIL 
•	
OLPS – Online leave management 
system for non-executive employees 
of CMPDIL
•	
Jobs – System for online ED Booking 
by CMPDIL employees 
•	
Update and maintenance of Public 
Website and Intranet website of 
CMPDIL
15.3	
Other IT Initiatives for CMPDIL
•	
ERP with its 6 modules namely HCM, 
FICO, PM, PS, MM and SD has been 
implemented in CMPDIL. Primary 
MPLS connectivity with 100 Mbps 
bandwidth at HQ, DC & DR and 40 
Mbps bandwidth at RIs has been 
established by Railtel Corporation. 
Secondary MPLS connectivity with 
500 Mbps bandwidth at HQ and 100 
Mbps bandwidth at RIs has been 
established by BSNL. 
•	
ICT Division has been doing the 
maintenance of Local Area Network 
with fibre optic backbone. All RIs have 
been connected with CMPDI (HQ) 
through MPLS VPN Circuit. CMPDI



	
127
is having 1 Gbps dedicated Internet 
Leased Line through BSNL and 1 
Gbps Secondary ILL through RailTel.
•	
NIT preparation, Technical scrutiny 
and New Technology Services 
•	
IT Infrastructure Management for HQ 
& RIs  
•	
Support for ERP, Networking, Software 
Licensing, Video Conferencing
•	
Co-ordination with CIL for Coal India 
mail 
•	
Co-ordination for e-Office activities for 
CMPDIL
•	
Network & Cyber security compliances 
•	
Managing SMS Services 
16.	
INFORMATION 
MANAGEMENT 
SYSTEM
The important activities / Jobs carried out 
during the year 2025-26 are as follows:
16.1	
Publication 
of 
CMPDIL’s 
bi-monthly 
technical booklet TechVista.
16.2	
Publication 
of 
quarterly 
magazines 
"Minetech" and "Gondwana Bharti”
16.3	
Apart from in-house distribution of both 
the magazines were dispatched during 
the year 2025-26 to MoC, CIL and its 
different subsidiaries (HQ, Area and 
colliery unit), different institutes and other 
known organizations.
16.4	
Publication of following books have been 
done during 2025-26:
	
Publication of 2nd edition of “Coal 
Atlas of India” in association of 
Exploration Division CMPDIL (HQ), 
Ranchi.
	
Designing and composition of “Coal 
Resources & Exploration in North 
Eastern Region” and publication of 
same in association of Exploration 
Division CMPDIL (HQ), Ranchi.
16.5	
Designing and composition of Coffee 
Table Book on Eco-Parks of Coal India 
Limited in association of Environment 
Division CMPDIL (HQ), Ranchi is under 
process.
16.6	
Sale of technical books & our in-house 
journal 'Minetech' in different subsidiaries 
of CIL and outside parties carried out as 
and when required by them.
16.7	 Special Achievements
	 The published 2nd edition of “Coal 
Atlas of India” has been Released by 
Honourable Minister of Coal, Ministry 
of Coal, Shri G Kishan Reddy along 
with other dignitaries during the 51st 
Coal India Foundation Day celebration 
on 1st  of November 2025 at Kolkata.
	 The 
published 
“Coal 
Resources 
& 
Exploration 
in 
North 
Eastern 
Region” book has been unveiled by 
Honourable Minister of Coal, Ministry 
of Coal, Shri G Kishan Reddy along 
with other dignitaries at the 2nd North 
East Mining Ministers Conclave at 
Guwahati, Assam. 
	 Release 
of 
inaugural 
issue 
of 
CMPDIL’s 
bi-monthly 
technical 
booklet TechVista on 26th January 
2026 by Board of Director’s CMPDIL 
and President Kasturi Mahila Sabha, 
with an objective for documenting 
departmental 
achievements, 
disseminate 
technical 
knowledge, 
and promote awareness of ongoing 
and future developmental initiatives 
among all.


128
17.	
VIGILANCE
17.1	 PUNITIVE VIGILANCE
a.	
Total No. of complaints received and action taken thereon:
Complaints
Year 2025-26
Pending complaints on 1st April 2025.
01
No. of complaints received during the period 1st April 2025 to 31st March 2026.
30
No. of complaints filed being anonymous/ Pseudonymous/ filed.
07
No. of complaints taken up for examination/ verification during the period 1st 
April 2025 to 31st March 2026.
09
No. of complaints forwarded to HODs/ GMs for taking needful action.
15
b.	
Cases under Regular Investigation (RI Cases):
Investigation cases
Year 2025-26
Pending cases on 1st April 2025
0
Cases taken up for investigation during the period 1st  April 2025 to 31st  March 
2026
0
No. of investigations completed during the period 1st  April 2025 to 31st  March 2026
0
Cases pending on 31st  March 2026
0
c.	
Number of cases taken up for Disciplinary action (RDA Cases):
No. of cases taken up for Disciplinary 
action (RDA Cases)
Cases
Year 2025-26
No. of persons
Major PP
Minor PP
Major
-
-
-
Minor
-
-
-
d.	
Departmental Enquiry:
No. of departmental inquiries completed
Year 2025-26
Cases
No. of persons
Completed
-
-
Part action
-
-



	
129
e.	
No. of Cases in which penalty imposed:
No. of Cases in which penalty imposed
Year 2025-26
Cases
No. of persons
Major:
Completed
-
-
Part action
-
-
Minor:
Completed
-
-
Part action
-
-
f.	
Checks conducted during the Year 2025-26:
Check Type
Year 2025-26
Converted into Regular 
Investigation
Periodic Checks conducted
15
-
Surprise Checks conducted
12
-
g.	
Cases under Intensive Examination (ITE Cases):
Year
ITE/CTE inspection
Converted into Regular 
Investigation
Year 2025-26
(1st  April 2025 to 31st  March 2026)
07
-
h.	
Scrutiny of Property Returns of Executives:
Year 2025-26
No. of scrutiny carried out
Year 2025-26
(1st  April 2025 to 31st  March 2026)
122
i.	
AGREED LIST / ODI LIST are being prepared at the beginning of every year.
17.2 	 PREVENTIVE VIGILANCE
Various measures are being taken by Vigilance Department, CMPDIL, to reduce the 
opportunities for corruptions and to ensure more transparency across CMPDIL.
Following preventive measures were done during the FY 2025-26:
Sl. No.
Type
Year 2025-26 
(1st April’25 to 31st March’26
01
Surprise Checks
12
02
Periodic Inspections
15
03
File scrutiny
11
04
Intensive Technical Examination (CTE-Type)
07
05
Scrutiny of Property Returns of Executives
122
06
Audit reports examined
08
07
Trainings
55


130
During the course of investigation of complaints and while undertaking Periodic Investigations 
or Surprise Checks by Vigilance Department, on the basis of irregularities detected in the 
prevailing system, preventive measures are recommended to the competent authority for 
System Improvement.
Following System Improvements Measures (SIM) were recommended during the Financial 
Year 2025-26 to reduce the opportunities for corruptions and to ensure more transparency:
1.	
Timely payment of medical claims including CPRMSE & CPRMS-NE
2.	
Standardization of buyer added additional terms and condition (ATC) for vehicle hiring 
services incorporated in GeM bids across CMPDIL.
3.	
Implementation of Biometric attendance system for contractual workers of CMPDIL.
4.	
Uniform Policies/Guidelines/Operating procedures for management of HSD at CMPDIL.
5.	
System Improvement Measures for Leased/Let-out Properties of CMPDIL.
6.	
Systemic Improvement Measure (SIM) for Revision and Recovery of Penal Rent and 
Mandatory Vacation of Company Quarters for Unauthorized Retention in CMPDIL.
7.	
Systemic Improvement Measures regarding Standardization of Labor and Material 
Components for Application of Price Variation Clause in Comprehensive Annual 
Maintenance Contracts (CAMC).
Following Vigilance Alerts were issued in the FY 2025-26 as a part of preventive vigilance 
measure so that areas of CCL remain well aware of the avoidable shortcomings.
1.	
Non-Adherence of Purchase Manual provisions regarding initiation of purchase action 
only after receipt of Purchase Requisition.
2.	
Non-Compliance with Manual provisions regarding closure of contract
3.	
Compliance of Contract Labour Information Portal (CLIP)
4.	
Vigilance Alert on irregularities in issuance of Medical cards and Reimbursement of 
Medical bills.
5.	
Vigilance Alert on Non-compliance with provisions of guidelines for e-procurement of 
works & services 2023, regarding adoption of single packet/two packet system.
6.	
Non-Compliance with e-procurement guidelines & Manual provisions regarding tender 
opening & constitution of Tender Committee members
05 Regional Institute (RI) / Area Nodal Officers are nominated from Vigilance department for 
different areas/establishments of CMPDIL, the list of which is as below.
Sl. No.
Name
Allotted Area
1.
Sri Suprakash Datta
CMPDIL HQ and RI-3, Ranchi
2.
Sri KL Rao
RI-4, Nagpur & RI-5, Bilaspur
3.
Sri SW Manzoor
RI-1, Asansol & RI-2, Dhanbad
4.
Sri Kushagra Nigam
RI-7, Bhubaneshwar
5.
Sri Kumud Ranjan Kumar
RI-6, Singrauli



	
131
The nodal officers are entrusted to carry 
out following works:
1.	 Best practices in the RIs.
2.	 Implementation of e-MB.
3.	 Low Value Tenders & Unusual delay 
in tenders.
4.	 Implementation 
of 
SAP/ERP/e-
office.
5.	 Quality check of Civil works, AMC 
etc.
6.	 Employee 
Capacity 
Building, 
Welfare & Grievance Monitoring.
7.	 Fuel Management (HSD)
8.	 Any other issue which required 
attention of Vigilance Department.
The outcomes observed after start of 
monthly visit are as below:
1.	 Better coordination with RI/Area 
management.
2.	 Implementation of e-MB across 
CMPDIL.
3.	 Discipline in Record maintenance.
4.	 Improved understanding of rules 
and guidelines.
5.	 Improvement in quality of Civil 
Works.
6.	 Reduction in number of low value 
tenders.
17.3 	 PARTICIPATIVE VIGILANCE
	
Observance of Vigilance Awareness 
Week-2025
In compliance with the directives 
of 
Central 
Vigilance 
Commission, 
New 
Delhi, 
Vigilance 
Awareness 
Campaign-2025 was observed on 
the theme of “Vigilance: Our Shared 
Responsibility” in Headquarter and 
all the regional institutes of CMPDIL 
from 18.08.2025 to 17.11.2025. Various 
events like display of banners, outreach 
activities such as Nukkad Nataks, 
Awareness Gram Sabha, programs in 
schools and colleges were organised 
during the three-month long awareness 
campaign. A major thrust was given to 
conduct workshop for capacity building on 
various topics like Procurement, contract 
and preventive vigilance etc.
Following events were organised during 
the VAC-2025:
(i)	
Integrity Pledge:
The observance of Vigilance Awareness 
Week 2025 commenced with taking of 
Integrity Pledge by all the employees 
at CMPDIL, HQ, Ranchi as well as in 
all the Regional Institutes of CMPDIL. 
Integrity pledge has been administered 
by CMD, CMPDIL in CMPDIL, HQ and 
respective Regional Directors in Regional 
Institutes of CMPDIL on 27.10.2025 and 
28.10.2025. Apart from taking pledge 
physically, e-pledge has been undertaken 
by 449 number of employees and 40 
number of customers.
Integrity Pledge in CMPDIL HQ Ranchi on 
28.10.2025


132
(ii)	
Walkathon:
CMPDIL 
HQ 
Ranchi 
organised 
a 
Walkathon 
on 
28.10.2025 
wherein 
employees carried placards with slogans 
promoting honesty and integrity and 
denouncing corruption. Approximately, 
250 employees participated in the event.
(iii)	
Nukkad Natak:
CMPDIL HQ Ranchi organised a Nukkad 
Natak (Street Play) in Kanke Road, Ranchi 
Railway Station and Vendor Market on 
28.10.2025 and 29.10.2025.
(iv)	
Plantation Drive:
CMPDIL 
HQ 
Ranchi 
organised 
a 
plantation drive on date 07th October 
2025 at CMPDIL residential campus. 
The drive (“एक पेड़ माँ के नाम (स्ममृति तरु)” 
Blends 
Vigilance 
Awareness 
with 
Environmental Responsibility. Through 
this plantation drive, CMPDIL sought to 
blend environmental responsibility with 
emotional and ethical awareness.
Plantation Drive in CMPDIL HQ Ranchi on 
07th October 2025
(v)	
Events organized at CMPDIL (HQ), 
Ranchi and various Schools/Institutes 
at Ranchi:
Various events like Speech competition, 
Drawing, Online Quiz Competition were 
organized for employees & the wards of 
employees posted at CMPDIL HQ from 
28.10.2025 to 04.11.2025. During the 
campaign period & VAW-2025, similar 
programs were held in Regional Institutes 
(RIs) also to promote the message of 
integrity amongst employees of CMPDIL.
(vi)	
Outreach Events in Schools
During the campaign, a major thrust area 
was to create awareness about vigilance 
in the young minds of school & college 
students. From 18.08.2025 to 17.11.2025, 
total 33 number of events were conducted 
in government schools in Jharkhand, 
Orrissa, Maharashtra and West Bengal. 
More than with 2100 students participated 
enthusiastically in the events organized 
by CMPDIL Vigilance department.



	
133
(vii)	
Awareness Gram Sabhas:
A total of 05 Awareness Sabhas were 
held in villages of Jharkhand, Orrissa 
and 
Maharashtra, 
with 
participation 
from local leaders such as Mukhiya, 
Sarpanch, 
villagers, 
students, 
and 
others. During these gatherings, a mass 
pledge was administered to the villagers, 
and discussions were held to raise 
awareness about vigilance matters and 
the various welfare measures CMPDIL 
has undertaken for its stakeholders.
Gram Sabha in Chiraundi Village, Ranchi on 
02.11.2025
(viii)	 Workshops/ Seminars at CMPDIL (HQ) 
and different RIs:
Several workshops, seminars & capacity 
building 
programs 
were 
organized 
at CMPDIL HQ & RIs of CMPDIL to 
increase the knowledge base & skill set of 
employees working at different places & 
levels in CMPDIL. As “ Capacity Building” 
was among one of the major thrust areas 
of CVC, a great emphasis was put on 
creating a culture in the organization 
where increase of knowledge & skill can 
be the cornerstone for minimizing errors. 
33 Capacity Building programs with 1119 
participants were organized during the 
campaign in across CMPDIL.
(ix)	
Blood Donation Camps:
To enhance stakeholder participation 
and reinforce the life-saving cause of the 
initiative, a mega blood donation camp 
was organized at CMPDIL HQ Ranchi 
on 09th October 2025 in association with 
CCL Gandhinagar and RIMS Ranchi. The 
camp recorded the collection of 104 units 
of blood, the highest among all camps 
conducted in CMPDIL till now.
CMPDIL, RI-IV Nagpur on 08th November 
2025 in association with Dr Hedgewar 
Blood Centre conducted a Blood Donation 
Camp. All healthy individuals, employee, 
contract 
workers 
and 
their 
family 
members aged 18-60 years participated 
in the donation program. A total of 48 
participants attended the session.
CMPDIL, RI-V Bilaspur on 17th November 
2025, conducted a blood donation camp 
in which 33-unit blood have been donated 
to the Govt. District Blood Bank in 
association with Chhattisgarh Institute of 
Medical Science Bilaspur (CIMS) a Govt 
Hospital.


134
Blood Donation Camp in CMPDIL HQ Ranchi 
on 09th October 2025
(x)	
Health Camps:
On 14th November 2025 a comprehensive 
Oral Health Check-up and Awareness 
Camp with a short session which focused 
on common oral health issues and 
maintenance tips.at CMPDIL Office RI-IV 
Nagpur led by Dental Surgeon. A total of 
35-40 participants attended the session 
and also participated in dental check-up.
(xi)	
Awareness through Message in CUG 
mobile & social media:
CMPDIL Vigilance left no stone unturned 
in creating awareness during the week and 
adopted some innovative ways to further 
sensitize the officials of CMPDIL. Details 
of Major events along with photographs 
were also uploaded on the official Twitter, 
Instagram, & Facebook accounts of 
CMPDIL. Inspirational messages were 
also aired on local FM Channels during 
VAW 2025.
(xii)	
Closing 
Ceremony 
of 
Vigilance 
Awareness Campaign   2025
The Closing Ceremony of VAC-2025 
was held on 17.11.2025 in the presence 
of the CMD, CMPDIL and the Functional 
Directors 
of 
CMPDIL. 
Prizes 
were 
awarded to the winners of various events 
conducted at CMPDIL HQ.
17.4 	 Outcomes of Vigilance Interventions
a. 	
Digital Initiatives
(i)	
Online Bill Tracking System for Medical 
Bills of Retired Employees:
As part of the systemic improvement 
measures undertaken by the Vigilance 
Department, CMPDIL, an online portal 
for tracking medical reimbursement bills 
submitted under the Post-Retirement 
Medical Scheme was launched on 
10.03.2026. Approximately 1,600 retired 
employees are expected to benefit 
from this initiative. Through the portal, 
beneficiaries can track the status of their 
medical bills in real time from submission 
to reimbursement along with details 
of deductions, if any. The system can 
be accessed from anywhere, ensuring 
greater convenience for pensioners. In 
addition, to enhance communication 
and transparency, SMS alerts are being 
sent to the registered mobile numbers 
of beneficiaries at various stages of bill 
processing, including receipt, scrutiny, 
approval, and payment of medical bills. 
This initiative is expected to enhance 
transparency, accountability, reliability, 
and efficiency in the reimbursement 
process, while also improving grievance 
redressal and overall service delivery.



	
135
(ii)	
Implementation of Online Medical Bill 
Processing through ESS in SAP for 
Executives in CMPDIL:
As part of the systemic improvement 
measures recommended by the Vigilance 
Department, CMPDIL, an online system 
for processing medical reimbursement 
bills 
through 
ESS 
(Employee 
Self 
Service) in SAP for executives of CMPDIL 
has been implemented. The system was 
rolled out across the entire CMPDIL 
w.e.f. 17.12.2025. Under this system, 
medical reimbursement bills are digitally 
submitted by the claimant through ESS. 
The entire process, including submission, 
approval, processing by Finance, and 
payment, is carried out electronically 
without involvement of any physical bills 
or hard copies of documents. The system 
also provides real-time tracking of bill 
status, approvals, and payment details, 
thereby ensuring better monitoring and 
transparency. Further, details of eligible 
medical dependents are automatically 
fetched 
from 
the 
SAP 
database, 
minimizing the possibility of processing 
claims relating to ineligible dependents. 
This initiative is expected to significantly 
enhance 
transparency, 
accountability, 
reliability, and efficiency in the medical 
reimbursement 
process, 
while 
also 
improving grievance redressal and overall 
service delivery.
(iii)	
Implementation 
of 
Electronic 
Measurement 
Book 
(e-MB): 
Implementation 
of 
e-MB 
in 
Civil 
Engineering Works is further a step 
towards more transparency.
18.	
GEOMATICS
	
Geomatics Division provides services 
in the field of Remote Sensing and 
Surveying. The major work includes 
Land 
Reclamation 
Monitoring, 
OB 
measurement, Vegetation Cover Mapping, 
Land Use /Cover Mapping, Settlement 
Mapping, Coal Mine Fire Mapping, 
DGPS survey, Topographical Survey, 
Underground Correlation Survey, Drone 
based Surveys for various applications 
etc
18.1 	 Remote Sensing Cell
a.	
Land Reclamation Monitoring  
CMPDIL 
has 
been 
carrying 
Land 
Reclamation Monitoring of CIL mines on 
a regular basis based on high resolution 
satellite data. In the year 2025-26, Land 
Reclamation Monitoring of total 110 
projects comprising of 75 Opencast 
Projects producing more than 5 Million 
Cubic Metre (Coal+OB) category and 35 
mines / Clusters producing less than 5 
Million Cubic Metre (Coal+OB) category 
under different subsidiaries of CIL has 
been completed.
b.	
Vegetation Cover mapping 
Vegetation 
Cover 
Mapping 
of 
CIL 
Coalfields based on high resolution 
satellite data is being done regularly for 
assessment of impact of mining on land 
use/ vegetation cover in the coalfield 
region. During FY 2025-26, Vegetation 
cover mapping of six coalfields namely, 
Wardha Valley CF  (WCL), Kamptee CF 
(WCL), Jharia CF (BCCL), Makum CF 
(NEC), Bishrampur CF (SECL) & Ib Valley 
CF (MCL), has been completed.
c.	
Land Use / Cover Mapping of Core & 
Buffer Zones for EMPs
Land Use / Cover Mapping of Core & 
Buffer Zone of 25 projects under different 
subsidiaries of CIL based on satellite data 
has been completed during 2025-26.


136
d.	
PM Gati Shakti Project (National 
Master Plan)
CMPDIL is coordinating and facilitating 
development of MoC page on PM Gati 
Shakti – National Master Plan Portal 
with Bhaskaracharya National Institute 
of Space Application & Geo Informatics, 
Gandhinagar (BISAG-N) for Ministry of 
Coal. 
CMPDIL, in coordination with BISAG-N, 
is also involved in development of various 
tools on PMGS-NMP Portal which can 
used for various analytical purposes.
CMPDIL is also using PMGS-NMP Portal 
for analysis upcoming and expansion 
projects and Project wise report(s) for 8 
Projects of different subsidiaries have 
been prepared.
A comprehensive Standard Operating 
Procedure for was prepared containing 
layer details, attributes, responsibilities 
and guidelines for users.
e.	
Coal 
Mine 
Surveillance 
and 
Management System
CMPDIL is ensuring smooth functioning 
and keeping the site of Coal Mine 
Surveillance and Management System 
along with the associated Mobile App, 
Khanan Prahari, in association with 
Bhaskaracharya National Institute of 
Space Application & Geo Informatics, 
Gandhinagar 
BISAG-N. 
The 
auto-
generated monthly reports are being sent 
by the system to the concerned.
f.	
Fire Mapping at Chirimiri OCM, SECL 
and Anjan Hill Mine, AMPL
CMPDIL has been entrusted to locate 
and identify fire spots at Chirimiri OCM 
through Thermal Imagery on annual basis 
for 5 years. The report based on Thermal 
Infrared Imagery of 2025 has already 
been prepared and submitted.  
g.	
Carrying Capacity assessment for 
NCL as a whole (Remote Sensing 
Perspective) 
In the financial year, LULC map including 
NDVI (Vegetation Index), NDWI (Water 
Index), LST (Land Surface temperature) 
for different time frames been generated 
and sent to the customer based on 
different feature and satellite.
h.	
MoU between the National Remote 
Sensing 
Centre 
(NRSC), 
Indian 
(Space Research Organisation (ISRO), 
Department 
of 
Space, 
Government 
of India), BCCL & CMPDIL, has been 
done for Delineation of Surface Coal 
Fire and associated Land Subsidence 
in Jharia coalfield (2025-27), Jharkhand 
using satellite based remote-sensing 
techniques.
18.2  	 Survey
a.	
OBR/ OB+Coal measurement 
OBR Measurement of all OC mines both 
outsourced and departmental producing 
more than 1 MTY and the annual 
measurement of OC mines producing 
less than 1 MTY (only hired patches) has 
been completed and reports have also 
been submitted. 
b.	
Drones Applications  
CMPDIL has fully operational Drone based 
capability for Topographical Mapping, 
Coal Mine Fire Mapping, Vegetation 
Cover Mapping, Settlement Mapping, 
Plantation Height Assessment and other 
activities related to mining.  
	
In the FY 2025-26, 
•	
Coal Stock Measurement using Drone 
base photogrammetry has been done 
for MCL.



	
137
•	
Sand Replenishment Study has been 
done for the States of Rajasthan, 
Bihar. 
•	
Topographical Survey using drones 
completed of Shaktigarh (UG) Coal 
block, WCL & Gola Coal block, CCL, 
•	
Creation of DTM/Surface Contour" for 
preparation of RPR of Rajrappa OCP, 
completed using drones.
•	
Drone survey for contour generation 
for Project Report for Proposed 
Reorganised Block-F OCP (Bastacolla 
Area Part)
•	
Drone based survey in the State of 
Uttar Pradesh is done in the identified 
sites for installation of Solar panels.
c.	
DGPS Survey Jobs:
•	
Preparation of CS plan (to be converted 
from RS plan) for application of Forest 
Proposal & allied works of the land 
falling under Latehar district in respect 
of (i) Sanghmitra Railway Siding (ii) 
Sanghmitra OCP, MG&S Area, CCL
•	
Preparation of KML, DGPS and Land 
Use plans of Forest land of Konar OCP 
(288.26 Ha) and Khasmahal Phase–II 
OCP (26.94 Ha), B&K Area, CCL
•	
DGPS Survey for preparation of 
DGPS plan of Extent of mining 
operation in Baragolai Colliery (UG 
Mine), Ledo Colliery (UG Mine) and 
Jeypore-Dilli Colliery (UG Mine) of 
North Eastern Coalfields, Coal India 
Limited, Margherita, Assam
•	
Conducting 
DGPS 
Survey 
of 
Gondulpara coal mine and its project 
area of Adani Enterprises Ltd for Mine 
plan certification
•	
DGPS 
Survey 
for 
Boundary 
Certification of Overburden Dump 
(130 ha) Boundary of Kerandari Coal 
Mining Project of M/s NTPC Ltd
•	
DGPS survey for verification of 
Boundary of Jitpur Coal Mining Project 
Area of Terri Mining Private Limited for 
Mine plan certification
•	
DGPS survey for finalization of block 
boundary of Sahapur East coal Block.
•	
DGPS survey of Mandla North Coal 
Block of M/s Dalmia Cement (Bharat) 
Ltd and other allied jobs.
•	
Preparation of KML and DGPS plan 
of Tapin South Ph-II OCP, Hazaribag 
Area, CCL
•	
DGPS survey for finalisation of Tasra 
Coal Block Boundary and ascertaining 
cardinal points of Tasra Coal Block
•	
DGPS survey for establishment of 
4 base stations (WGS 84) at west of 
Shahdol(South) Coal Block. Base 
point shall be established with respect 
to Survey of India Station/ Control 
points in nearby MCL mines.
•	
DGPS survey for finalization of block 
boundary of Mandakini-A coal Block of 
Karnataka Power Corporation Limited
•	
DGPS survey for Slope Geometry/
Profile of the entire Pahari Mandir Hill
•	
DGPS survey for Geo-referencing of 
cadastral/revenue plans of the villages 
falling within Chatti Bariatu South Coal 
Block of M/s National Thermal Power 
Corporation
•	
DGPS Survey of both Block boundary 
and BCCL acquired land of non-CIL 
block to assess the extent of overlap 
area of BCCL acquired land with non-
CIL block.
•	
Preparation of DGPS plan, KML file 
and marking of double degraded forest 
land for Compensatory afforestation 
on toposheet in respect of diversion of 
forest land measuring 4.97 Ha under 
KDH Project, NK Area, CCL


138
•	
DGPS survey of block boundary of 
Khadsaliya Lignite Mines of GHCL 
Limited and certification of the said 
block boundary
•	
DGPS Survey of all coal blocks under 
auction.
d.	 Gyroscope Survey done for alignment 
checking 
for 
HSR 
Project 
C-2, 
Mumbai, India (Bullet Train Project) 
e.	 Correlation Survey using Gyroscope 
done for Bahula Colliery, Kenda Area, 
ECL
f.	 Assessment of overlap of acquired 
land by subsidiaries with Non-CIL coal 
Blocks in CCL Command Area
19.	
MINING ELECTRONICS
Mining Electronics Division of CMPDIL 
renders services in preparing Feasibility 
Reports, 
Detailed 
Design 
Reports, 
Preparation of Tech. Specs., BOQ, and 
Budgetary Cost & Eligibility Criteria for 
Operator Independence Truck Dispatch 
System (OITDS) and Tender Documents 
for establishing communication network, 
Tele-monitoring 
of 
Environmental 
Parameters for U/G and O/C mines, Audio 
Visual Multimedia System for Museum and 
smart classroom. It also renders valuable 
services to subsidiary, Implementation of 
5G Network/5G Use cases in Mines. The 
department has also undertaken different 
R&D/S&T Projects for Open Cast and 
Underground Mines related to productivity 
and safety of mines. The following jobs 
were completed/ operational during the 
year.
19.1 	 R&D/S&T Projects
a.	 5G 
Captive 
Non-public 
Network 
(CNPN) for Integrated Voice, Video 
& Data Communication in Opencast 
Coal Mines” under CIL R&D grant 
at Amlohri OC mines , NCL jointly 
executed by CMPDIL & CDAC, 
Thiruvananthapuram. – 5G CNPN 
implemented & field trial of Use 
Cases are currently underway.
b.	 Automation, 
Control 
& 
Wireless 
Communication in UG Mines on 
4G LTE/5G Ready Communication 
Network jointly executed by CMPDIL 
& ITI Lucknow in Jhanjhra Mine, 
ECL under CIL R&D grant –Under 
Progress.
c.	 Design and Development of low-cost 
indigenous imaging RADAR system for 
automatic slope monitoring and failure 
prediction in opencast coalmines 
jointly executed by CMPDIL & NIT 
Rourkela in Bharatpur OC Mine under 
CIL S&T grant –Under Progress.
19.2	
P&D/NIT/other jobs
a.	 Preparation 
of 
the 
DPR 
for 
Implementation of 5G Technology 
with 
5G 
Captive 
Non-Public 
Network(CNPN) & 5G Use Cases 
at Barora Area, BCCL-Draft DPR 
submitted.
b.	 Preparation 
of 
the 
DPR 
for 
Implementation of 5G Technology 
with 
5G 
Captive 
Non-Public 
Network(CNPN) & 5G Use Cases at 
Integrated Lakhanpur- Belpahar-Lilari 
(ILBL) Project, Lakhanpur Area, MCL-
Under preparation.
c.	 Chapters 
on 
Electronics 
& 
Telecommunication for 29 Nos. of UG 
and OC mines for inclusion in Project 
Reports of different subsidiaries of 
CIL and outside agencies have been 
prepared.
d.	 Exhibition & Showcasing of Advance 
5G Use Cases for Coal Industry at 
Indian Mobile Congress-2025, held at 
Yashobhoomi, New Delhi from 8th Oct. 
to 11th Oct. 2025.
e.	 Audio Visual Multimedia System for 
CMPDIL Earth Science Museum. –  In 
operation & maintenance.



	
139
f.	 SAP enabled Biometric Attendance System. – In operation & maintenance.
g.	 Technical Specification for CCTV system for RI-I & CDS Barkakana - Submitted.
h.	 Technical Specification for CCTV system for CMPDIL(HQ) – Technical specification 
prepared, estimate under preparation.
i.	 Technical Specification for Dash-cam & GPS system for Camps & Drilling sites of CMPDIL 
- Technical specification prepared, estimate under preparation.
20.	
COAL CHARACTERISATION & LABORATORY
Coal Characterisation Laboratory comprises of Chemical & Petrography Laboratory. 
The Chemical and Petrography labs are engaged in carrying out Systematic and detailed 
characterization of coal at exploration stage on routine basis for incorporation in Geological 
Report. Systematic characterization of raw & clean coal samples (washery products) and 
characterization of coal samples for CBM assessment is being carried out for ascertaining the 
clean coal properties.
The Chemical Lab carries out tests such as proximate analysis, ultimate analysis, and gross 
calorific value determination. For coking coal special tests such as free swelling index, LTGK 
coke type and Plastometric Test are carried out. Ash fusion temperature range determination, 
HGI tests for non-coking coals are also done.
20.1 	 Upggradation of laboratories and Progress of Coal Charecterisation Lab
The Chemical Lab is currently implementing its scheme on augmentation of capacity of coal 
core analysis by introducing automation in sample  preparation unit which will cater to handling 
of large no of analysis .The Chemical Lab is equipped with conventional and sophisticated 
equipment(s) like Thermogravimetric Analyser for proximate analysis of coal/coke/lignite, 
automatic Bomb Calorimeter for determination of gross calorific value of coal & lignite, CHNS 
apparatus for determination of Carbon, Hydrogen, Nitrogen & Sulphur, AFTR instrument for 
Ash fusion temperature range (IDT, ST, HT & FT) of coal,   Instruments  such as Swelling 
Index,LTGK,Plastometer for determination of plasticity of coal and other equipments are 
availaible for determining  coking properties of coal. The laboratory has very recently equipped 
itself with X-Ray Diffractometer system (XRD) for carrying out analysis of identification of 
mineral phases in Coal & non-coal samples and X-Ray Fluorescence (XRF) for determination 
of elements in oxide form in coal ash.
The Petrography Lab carries out petrographic analysis such as determination of maceral 
composition, random reflectance (RoR %) and mean maximum reflectance % (MMR %). This 
study is done to determine the coal-type and coal rank of the samples. This study is also 
useful for source rock evaluation for hydrocarbons, oil shales, coal bed methane and shale 
gas assessment. 
The petrography lab is equipped with Advance Petrological Microscopes for carrying out 
Petrographic studies in which the maceral content (Coal type) and reflectance percentage 
(Rank/Maturity) of coal samples are determined.  Petrographic studies are imperative for 
ascertaining the suitability of given coal as blends in coke making. Abrasive cutting machine 
and Hot mounting press for preparation of coal pellets for Petrographic studies and cleat study 
are also available.
Geo-Chemical Laboratory is accredited with NABL Certification in accordance with the 
standard ISO/IEC 17025:2017 for its facilities in the   field of “Testing”in 12 Different scopes.


140
Petrographers in petrography lab have been certified by International Committee of Coal and 
Organic petrology(ICCP).
20.2 	 Progress of Coal Characterisation Laboratory for F.Y. 2025-26
UNIT
 DESCRIPTION
ANNUAL 
TARGET
ACHIEVEMENT 
FOR F.Y 2025-26
ACHIEVEMENT 
FOR F.Y 2024-25
%Growth 
CHEMICAL 
LAB DIVISION
1. SAMPLE 
ANALYSIS       (No.s)
59000
67113
60069
(+) 11.73 %
 
2. COAL CORE (m)
18000
21123.22
21072.62
(+) 0.24 %
Petrography 
Division
1. PETROGRAPHY 
STUDY (No’s)
965
931
969
(-) 3.92 %
20.3 	 Performance of the Laboratory
a. Physical Achievement The Coal Characterization Laboratory demonstrated remarkable 
growth compared to the previous year, as detailed below:
•	
The Chemical Laboratory Division analyzed 67,113 number of samples, exceeding the 
target of 59,000 samples (achieving 113.75 % of the target). Moreover, 21123.22 meters of 
coal cores were processed for sample preparation, surpassing the target of 18,000 meters 
(achieving 117.35 % of the target). Compared to last year, there was a 11.73 % increase in 
sample analysis and 0.24 % growth in coal core processing.
•	
A total of 931 samples were analyzed for Petrographic studies, closely chasing the target 
of 965 samples set for exploration blocks, MoC, Washery, and CBM related jobs.
•	
Coal samples from different private enterprises were tested and results were communicated 
on time.
•	
The laboratory is in process of analyzing various samples from CED, CMP divisions of 
CMPDIL H.Q and Running mines of ECL, CCL & BCCL.
E.	
Outlook and Preparedness
•	
The Chemical Lab is currently implementing its scheme on augmentation of capacity of 
coal core analysis by introducing automation in sample preparation unit which will cater to 
handling of large no of analysis.
•	
The laboratory has established non coal samples (Base metals) preparation unit comprising 
vibratory cup mills and automatic Jaw crushers for sample preparation of desired   sample 
size requirements which is first of its type in CMPDIL.
•	
Under the process of Mineral identification in coal and non-coal, laboratory has established 
fully functional X-Ray Diffractometer (XRD) and the X-Ray Fluorescence (XRF) facility. The 
X-Ray Diffractometer enables the analysis of mineral presence in unknown samples and 
the detection of free silica in mine dust samples. The X-Ray Fluorescence system (XRF) is 
utilized for conducting ash analysis and analyzing other metal oxides.
•	
The laboratory has successfully established an ICP-MS (Inductively Coupled Plasma – 
Mass Spectroscopy) facility for qualitative and quantitative identification of Rare Earth 
Elements (REE) and trace metals.
•	
In its initiative to develop a Mineral Identification facility for non-coal samples, the laboratory 
is procuring a rock cutting and polishing unit along with a Reflected Light Polarizing 
Research Microscope.



	
141
21.	
MATERIAL MANAGEMENT
21.1 	 Goods Procurement details.
(₹ in Crore)
Sl. N.
Particulars
F.Y. 2023-24
F.Y. 2024-25
F.Y. 2025-26
1
Total Procurement value
160.89
374.65
350.02
2
Total value procured from MSEs
130.25
255.54
202.73
3
Total value of goods procured from 
MSEs owned by SC/ST Entrepreneurs
0.48
1.04
1.98
4
Total value of goods procured from 
MSEs owned by Women Entrepreneurs
1.49
19.61
14.17
5
Percentage of procurement from MSEs 
out of total procurement.
80.95%
68.20%
57.92%
6
Percentage of procurement from MSEs 
owned by SC/ST Entrepreneurs out of 
total procurement.
0.29%
0.28%
0.57%
7
Percentage procurement from MSE 
owned by Women Entrepreneurs out of 
total procurement.
0.92%
5.23%
4.05%
Notes:
1.	
MSME SAMBANDH Portal is being updated on monthly basis with the procurement data.
2.	
Shortfall in MSE Procurement Target: 4% procurement target mandated for procurement from 
MSEs owned by SC/ST Entrepreneurs has not been achieved due to lack of participation of 
SC/ST owned units in CMPDIL tenders, mainly because CMPDIL is an exploration, planning, 
design, research & development organization which requires high tech machinery and 
accessories, software etc.
3.	
As part of its efforts to fulfil mandated procurement requirements from SC/ST MSE vendors, 
CMPDIL conducts Special Vendor Development Programmes. These programmes provide 
participating vendors with insights into CMPDI’s procurement procedures and highlighted the 
items commonly procured.
21.2 	 Procurement through GeM in F.Y. 2025-26:
(₹ in Crore)
Targeted Procurement through GeM
Actual Procurement through GeM
Goods
Services
Goods
Services
45
225
53.69
282.76
21.3 	 Target for the Financial Year 2026-27	
 
  
(₹ in Crore)
Sl. No.
Particulars
Goods
Services
Total
1
Total Targeted Procurement (GeM + Outside GeM)
60.00
150.00
210.00
2
Targeted Procurement from MSEs (Approximately 
40% of total procurement, subject to participation of 
MSEs in the tenders issued by CMPDIL )
24.00
60.00
84.00


142
21.4  On-boarding on TReDS platforms: CMPDIL has on-boarded five TReDS platforms, 
details of which are as under:
S. No.
Name of the TReDS 
platform
Membership No of 
CMPDIL
CMPDIL on-boarding on 
TReDS platform
1
Receivable Exchange of India 
Ltd. (RXIL)
CE0000779
16.03.2020
2
M1 exchange (Mynd Solutions 
Pvt Ltd)
BUYER00042346
18.11.2024
3
InvoiceMart
1000039340
10.10.2024
4
C2treds 
U0002293
06.03.2025
5
DTX KredX 
CO5KM4764M1N
09.03.2026
21.5 	 Timely Payments to MSE Vendors (directly or through TReDS) within prescribed 
timelines under the MSMED Act, 2006:
(i)	
Total amount involved: Rs. 128.51 Crores
(ii)	
Number of invoices: 1995
(iii)	
Number of supplies involved in delays: 0
(iv)	
Total annual procurement value: Rs. 345.70 Crores
(v)	
Total number of invoices during the year: 1995
(vi)	
Total number of suppliers during the year engaged in annual procurement: 515
CMPDIL has ensured timely payments to MSE Vendors within prescribed timelines under the 
MSMED Act, 2006.
22.	
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
Training and Development constitute a vital pillar of employee growth and organizational 
effectiveness. At CMPDIL, concerted efforts are being undertaken to ensure the continuous 
and holistic development of employees throughout their careers. The “CIL Executive Learning & 
Development Policy” is being systematically implemented to unlock the full potential of human 
capital across the organization. This structured approach aims to build critical organizational 
capabilities essential for achieving long-term corporate objectives and strategic goals.
As per the policy, each executive is required to complete a structured training cycle of four 
years, commencing from FY 2023–24. During this cycle, every executive is mandated to 
undergo a minimum of 90 hours of training. Accordingly, a comprehensive Training Needs 
Assessment (TNA) has been conducted for CMPDIL executives to identify and align their 
training requirements over the four-year block period from FY 2023–24 to 2026–27.



	
143
During  the  year  2025-26,  the  total  ONLINE / OFFLINE  Training/Conference /Seminar/
Workshop conducted has been summarized below :-
22.1 	 Training Programs Conducted by HRD department:
Programs
Target Programs
Actual programs
Target Participants
Actual 
participants
In-house program
46
63
730
1531
External Program
-
112
-
392
IICM program
-
66
-
218
Total
46
241
730
2141
	
In-house training programmes : are regularly conducted to enhance technical competencies, 
including emerging areas such as Artificial Intelligence and digital transformation, along with 
managerial and behavioural skills. These programmes are designed for junior, middle, and 
senior-level employees across CMPDIL Headquarters and its Regional Institutes, ensuring 
comprehensive capability development aligned with organizational needs..
	
Rashtriya Karmyogi program : Around 1000 employees (Executives and Non-Executives) of 
CMPDIL successfully underwent a one-day in-house training programme under the Rashtriya 
Karmayogi Programme , A Large Jan Sewa Program – A way to behavioral change under the 
directives of Capacity Building Commission.
22.2 	 Flagship Programs at In-House (STC) :
•	
Training on LEICA DGPS & software.
•	
Physical/ onsite training of CARLSON software
•	
Training programme on geological report preparation.
•	
Training on VULCAN software.
•	
Program on MINEX software for mine planners.
•	
ARC GIS pro./ enterprises software.
•	
Training program on TLS AND SOP.
•	
Workshop on understanding artificial intelligence & it’s application in business
•	
Training on operational planning & closure-suitable mine planning progressive 
rehabilitation, mines closure planning, environmental impact assessment.
•	
Training program on aquatic ecology and plankton analysis with the use of microscope at 
environment laboratory
•	
Training programme on CMPF claims, transfer policy & sensitive post rotation for executive 
of CMPDIL.
•	
Training program on ABHYUDAYA: the evolution of India’s labour regulatory framework.
22.3 	 External Training Programes At Various Centre Of Excellence
Throughout the year, executives are deputed to reputed organizations and institutions to 
participate in training programs, conferences, workshops, conclaves, and symposiums aimed


144
at enhancing their technical and managerial competencies and keeping them abreast of the 
latest developments in their respective fields. During the current year, a total of 163 executives 
and non-executives have attended both online and offline programmes across various 
locations in India. These programmes were conducted by premier institutions such as IIT (ISM) 
Dhanbad, IIT Bombay, IIT Mumbai, IIM Lucknow, IIM Ranchi, IIM Mumbai, IIM Visakhapatnam, 
CBRI Roorkee, ASCI Hyderabad, IIRS Dehradun, NITS Noida, and ONGC Dehradun.
22.4 	 External Training at CIL Apex Training Center – IICM
	
During FY 2025–26, a significant number of junior, middle, and senior-level executives were 
nominated for training programmes at IICM in accordance with its annual training calendar. 
Nominations were made based on the outcomes of the Training Needs Assessment (TNA) 
and through the HRIS platform. In total, 171 executives participated in both online and offline 
training programmes conducted at IICM during the year.
22.5 	 Apprentices Training
In compliance with the Apprentices Act, 1961, CMPDIL is required to engage apprentices 
equivalent to a minimum of 2.5% of its average manpower strength, including contractor 
workers—translating to an approximate target of 100 apprentices. Exceeding this mandate, 
CMPDIL has engaged a total of 206 apprentices, representing 4.83% of the workforce. This 
cohort comprises 115 diploma holders, 49 engineering graduates, and 42 non-engineering 
graduates, all of whom have been deployed across various Regional Institutes (RIs) and 
Headquarters for FY 2026–27.
22.6 	 Internship Training
	
The HRD Division of CMPDIL facilitates structured summer and winter internship programmes, 
along with industrial training opportunities, for students from diverse academic institutions. 
These engagements are conducted across CMPDIL Headquarters and its Regional Institutes 
located in various states. During FY 2025–26, a total of 212 students were imparted internship 
training, wherein they undertook structured learning and project assignments for a duration of 
4–6 weeks in their respective disciplines, enabling practical exposure and industry-oriented 
skill development.
22.7 	 iGOT KARMAYOGI
	
iGot Karmyogi is a flagship digital learning platform developed under the Government of India’s 
capacity-building initiative as part of the Digital India framework. It serves as an Integrated 
Government Online Training (iGOT) portal, enabling continuous learning and competency 
development for government employees through an “anytime, anywhere, any device” approach. 
The platform offers a wide range of curated courses aimed at enhancing functional, behavioural, 
and domain-specific skills, thereby supporting employees in achieving their professional and 
career objectives.
	
In addition to conventional training programmes, CMPDIL actively encourages its employees 
to leverage the iGOT platform for self-paced learning and continuous upskilling. The level 
of engagement on the platform reflects a strong learning culture within the organization. As 
of 31.03.2026, executive employees have completed a total of 14,722 courses, while non-
executive employees have completed 3,849 courses on the iGOT platform, demonstrating



	
145
substantial participation in the Government of India’s capacity-building initiative. A majority 
of employees have completed at least one course, and during a special drive, a significant 
number of employees also undertook courses on Artificial Intelligence, further strengthening 
their digital competencies.
23.	
MANPOWER AND WELFARE ACTIVITIES
23.1 	 Status of Manpower:
Particulars
As on March 31,2025
As on March 31,2026
Executive
791
783
Non-Executive
Monthly Rated
940
965
Daily Rated
969
886
Piece Rated
1
0
Grand Total
2701
2634
23.2 	 Welfare Activities
	
Details of observance of various important days and events are as follows-
S. N.
Programme/Event 
Date
Activities conducted 
1.
Republic Day
26th January
Flag hoisting, National Anthem, Patriotic 
activities and prize distribution ceremony 
cultural activity by school students.
2.
Dr. Bhimrao 
Ambedkar Jayanti
14th April
Tribute 
ceremonies, 
different 
competitions are organized for students, 
children and employees.
3.
Anti-Terrorism Day
21st May
 Anti-terrorism pledge.
4.
Summer Camp
31th May 2025 to 
09th June 2025
CSR initiatives for the children of 
employees 
and 
local 
communities, 
focusing on sports, arts, and skill 
development.
5.
Swachhta Pakhwada
15th June to 30 
June
cleanliness 
drives 
and 
walk 
for 
cleanliness events.
6.
Independence day
15th August
Patriotic 
activities, 
Flag 
hoisting, 
Remembering freedom fighters.
7.
CMPDIL Inter 
RI Badminton 
Tournament
20th August 2025 
to 22th August 
2025
All Regional Institutes of CMPDIL 
participate in the tournaments organized 
at HQ and different RIs
8.
National Sports Day
29th
Sports events and competitions
9.
Swachhta Hi Seva
15th 
September 
to 02nd October
Different activities conducted to promote 
cleanliness
10.
Mahatma Gandhi 
Jayanti
02nd October
Floral Tribute to portrait of Mahatma 
Gandhi
11.
Special Campaign
02nd Oct. to 31st 
Oct.
Activities under Special Campaign 5.0 
conducted


146
S. N.
Programme/Event 
Date
Activities conducted 
12.
Run for Unity
1st November
Unity runs, Tributes to Sardar Vallabhbhai 
Patel, National unity pledge.
13.
CIL Foundation Day
1st November
Speech 
& 
Achievements 
highlight, 
Awards & recognition.
14.
Mahaparinirvan 
Diwas of Dr. Bhimrao 
Ambedkar
6th November 
Mahaparinirvan Diwas of Dr. Bhimrao 
Ambedkar was observed by paying 
homage.
15.
Commemoration of 
National Song
7th November
150th Anniversary of National Song, 
Vande Mataram, was commemorated.
16.
Communal Harmony 
Campaign Week
19th November
Pledge
17.
The Constitution Day
26th November
Essay / quiz / competitions
18.
Flag Day
07th December
Tribute to Armed Forces, Flag distribution, 
Flag Day Fund Collection.
19.
CMPDIL Inter 
RI Volley Ball 
Tournament
04th 
December 
2025 
to 
06 
December 2025
All Regional Institutes of CMPDIL 
participate in the tournaments organized 
at HQ and different RIs
20.
CIL Inter Subsidiary 
Volley Ball 
Tournament
17th 
December 
2025 
to 
19th 
December 2025
All subsidiaries of CIL and SCCL 
participate in the tournament organized 
at CMPDIL HQ.
23.3 	 RI Wise Status of RTI Applications
RTI ANNUAL REPORT CMPDIL  2025-26
Area
Openning 
Balance on 
31st March 
2025
Total No. of 
Applications 
Received
No. of 
Applications 
Transferred 
under Section 
6(3)
Total No. of 
Applications 
Rejected
Total No. of 
Applications 
Replied
Total No. of 
Applications 
Disposed Off
Remaining 
Applications
HQ
21
263
48
3
218
269
15
RI-I
0
6
0
0
6
6
0
RI-II
1
11
0
0
12
12
0
RI-III
0
6
0
0
6
6
0
RI-IV
0
25
0
0
23
23
2
RI-V
0
15
1
0
14
15
0
RI-VI
0
12
0
0
12
12
0
RI-VII
0
9
0
0
8
8
1
Total 
22
347
49
3
299
351
18



	
147
First appeal under RTI CMPDIL  2025-26
Area
Opening Balance 
on 31st March 2025
Total No. of 
Applications Received
Total No. of Applications 
Disposed Off
Remaining 
Applications
HQ
2
12
14
0
RI-I
0
1
1
0
RI-II
0
1
0
1
RI-III
0
0
0
0
RI-IV
0
1
1
0
RI-V
0
0
0
0
RI-VI
0
0
0
0
RI-VII
0
0
0
0
Total
2
15
16
1
CIC 2nd appeal under RTI CMPDIL 2025-26
Area 
Opening Balance 
on 31st March 2025
Total No. of 
Applications Received
Total No. of 
Applications Disposed 
Off
Remaining 
Applications
HQ
0
2
2
0
RI-I
0
0
0
0
RI-II
0
0
0
0
RI-III
0
0
0
0
RI-IV
0
0
0
0
RI-V
0
0
0
0
RI-VI
0
0
0
0
RI-VII
0
0
0
0
Total
0
2
2
0
CMPF & Pension data for Annual Report 2025-26
Area
Total Cases of PF Received 
during the year 2025 - 26
Settled
Under Process at 
CMPFO
Under Process at 
CMPDIL
HQ
42
42
0
0
RI-I
4
4
0
0
RI-II
1
1
0
0
RI-III
12
12
0
0
RI-IV
6
6
0
0
RI-V
14
14
0
0
RI-VI
11
11
0
0
RI- VII
5
4
0
1
Total
95
94
0
1


148
Area
Total Cases of Pension Received 
during the year 2025 - 26
Settled
Under Process at 
CMPFO
Under Process 
at CMPDIL
HQ
42
41
1
0
RI-I
4
4
0
0
RI-II
1
1
0
0
RI-III
12
10
2
0
RI-IV
6
5
1
0
RI-V
14
14
0
0
RI-VI
11
11
0
0
RI- VII
5
4
0
1
Total
95
90
4
1
23.5 	 Major Information related to Executive Establishment for the Year 2025-26
Sl. 
No.
Annual Work Plan
Action 
taken
1.
Settlement of Terminal benefit(Gratuity)
32
2.
Settlement of Terminal benefit(Gratuity) Pending due to non-vacation of company quarter
04
3.
Settlement of Terminal benefit(Gratuity) Pending due to Disciplinary Proceeding
01
4.
Settlement of Terminal benefit(Gratuity)- Under Process
01
5.
Payment of Life Cover Scheme
00
6.
Life Cover Scheme Under Process
01
7.
Leave encashment on superannuation
28
8.
Leave encashment on superannuation pending due to non- vacation of company quarter
04
9.
Leave encashment on superannuation pending due to Disciplinary Proceeding
01
10.
Leave encashment on superannuation under process
04
23.6 	 Information related to CPGRAM during the year 2025-26
Sl. No
Grievance Source
Total Application 
Received
Application 
Disposed off
Balance/ 
under Process
1
Local/internet/ Direct from 
Complainant
39
38
1
2
Pension
0
0
0
3
PMO
3
3
0
23.7 	 Information related to VIP reference during the year 2025-26
Sl. No
Grievance Source
Total Application 
Received
Application 
Disposed off
Balance/ 
under Process
1
Local/internet/ Direct from 
Complainant
15
14
01



	
149
23.8 	 Information related to Non-Executive employees during the Year 2025-26
Sl. 
No.
Annual Work Plan
Action 
taken
1
Settlement of Terminal benefit(Gratuity)
72
2
Settlement of Terminal benefit(Gratuity) pending due to non-vacation of 
company quarter
12
3
Settlement of Terminal benefit(Gratuity) pending due to pending Disciplinary 
Proceeding 
0
4
Settlement of Terminal benefit(Gratuity) Under Process
2
5
Payment of Life Cover Scheme settled 
9
6
Payment of Life Cover Scheme Under Process
1
7
Leave encashment on superannuation Received 
62
8
Leave encashment on superannuation settled 
56
9
Leave encashment on superannuation pending due to non-vacation of company 
quarter
7
10
Leave encashment on superannuation pending due to Disciplinary Proceeding
0
11
Leave encashment on superannuation  pending/ Withheld  due to any dispute.
0
12
Leave encashment on superannuation Under Process 
9
23.9 	 Information related Issue of Medical Card under CPRMSE Scheme (Executive & Non 
Executives) during the Year 2025-26
•	
55 Medical cards has been issued under CPRMSE Scheme (Executive & Non Executives)
23.10 	Representation of SC/ST/OBC as on 31.03.26
Group
Total Strength
SC
ST
OBC
General
A
786
112
44
184
446
B
159
26
12
53
68
C
978
164
105
280
429
D-ES
707
96
74
224
313
D-S (Safai 
Karamchari)
8
7
1
0
0
23.11 	 RAJBHASHA (2025-26)
Your company continued to implement the statutory provisions of the Official Language Act, 
Official Language Rules and the directives of the Ministry of Home Affairs (Official Language), 
Ministry of Coal, Coal India Limited and Town Official Language Implementation Committee 
and made multidimensional efforts to enhance the progressive use of Official Language Hindi 
in official work during the period under review.


150
Your company achieved the target of 
Hindi correspondence in Region "C" and 
was very close to achieve the target of 
Hindi correspondence in Region "A"&" 
"B'' fixed by the Ministry of Home Affairs, 
Department of Official Language, New 
Delhi in its Annual Programme during the 
year under review.
Besides, documents under Section 3 (3) of 
the Official Language Act, the minutes of 
the different meetings held at the level of 
C M D/Directors, the Monthly and Annual 
Reports of your company also continued 
to be prepared bilingually. 
In the month of September 2025, "Raj 
Bhasha Pakhwada" was organized as 
per the directives of Ministry of Coal. 
In order to promote and make Hindi 
popular among the employees of the 
company, several Hindi competitions 
were organized during the month. A large 
number of employees participated in all 
the competitions held during the month. 
Winners were awarded first prize of 
Rs5000, second prize Rs4000, third prize 
Rs3000 and consolation prize Rs800. 
All prize winners were also awarded 
certificate in their respective category. In 
addition, remainder participants were also 
awarded.
As 
per 
the 
Directive 
and 
Annual 
Programme issued by Department of 
Official Language, Ministry of Home 
Affairs, New Delhi inspection of RIs and 
different department of headquarters was 
also done.
Quarterly meetings of Official Language 
Implementation Committee were also 
organized under the Chairmanship of 
CMD to review quarterly progress of 
Official Language in different departments 
of your company as per the Directive and 
Annual Programme issued by Department 
of Official Language, Ministry of Home 
Affairs, New Delhi. 
Your company were also organized two half 
yearly meetings of Town Official Language 
Implementation 
Committee 
(PSU), 
Ranchi (Nagar Rajbhasha Karyanwyan 
Samiti) under the Chairmanship of CMD 
to review progress of Official Language in 
different PSUs.
24.	
DISCLOSURE AND INFORMATION 
UNDER SEXUAL HARASSMENT 
TO WOMEN:
CMPDIL has implemented an Anti-Sexual 
Harassment Policy in accordance with 
the provisions of The Sexual Harassment 
of Women at Workplace (Prevention, 
Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013. 
Internal Complaints Committees (ICCs) 
have 
been 
constituted 
to 
address 
complaints related to sexual harassment.
The numbers of compliant or cases of 
sexual harassment to women at working 
place in CMPDIL has been reported 
during the year 2025-26 under the 
disclosure and information under Sexual 
Harassment to Women at Workplace 
(Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) 
Act, 2013 is as follows:
1. 	 Number 
of 
sexual 
harassment 
complaints received in a year – 01 
2. 	 Number of complaints disposed of in a 
year – Nil
3. 	 Number of complaint in which enquiry 
under process in a year -01
4. 	 Number of cases pending for more 
than 90 days – Nil 
5. 	 Number of awareness programs or 
workshops against sexual harassment 
conducted in a year –Nil (online) 
6.	 Nature of action taken by the employer 
or District Officer with respect to the 
case – N/A
25.	
ACHIEVEMENT AGAINST NON-FI-
NANCIAL PARAMETERS OF MOU



	
151
2023-24 BETWEEN CMPDIL & CIL
25.1	
Drilling (Dept. drilling only):
As per MoU 2025-26 of CMPDIL, under 
the head ‘Drilling (Dept. drilling only) (Lakh 
Meter), Sl. No. 2.0’, the achievement was 
4.73 lakh metres of drilling against the 
target of 4.3 lakh metres of drilling.
25.2	
Drilling (Total):
As per MoU 2025-26  of CMPDIL, under 
the head ‘Drilling (Total) (Lakh Meter), Sl. 
No. 2.1’, the achievement was 11.50 lakh 
metres of drilling against the target of 11 
lakh metres of drilling.
25.3	
Procurement 
through 
GeM 
(as 
percentage of total procurement):
As per MoU 2025-26 of CMPDIL, under 
the head ‘Procurement through GeM (as 
percentage of total procurement) (%), Sl. 
No. 8.0’, the achievement was 96.12% 
against target of 70%.
25.4 	 Preparation of Scheme/NIT along with 
Cost estimate of FMC Projects:
As per MoU 2025-26  of CMPDIL, 
under the head ‘Preparation of Scheme/ 
NIT along with Cost estimate of FMC 
Projects (Nos.), Sl. No. 9.0’, the target of 
‘Preparation of Scheme/ NIT along with 
Cost estimate of 3 nos. of FMC Projects’ 
was achieved.
25.5 	 Preparation 
and 
submission 
of 
geological report:
As per MoU 2025-26 of CMPDIL, under 
the head ‘Preparation and submission 
of geological report (Nos.), Sl. No. 10.0’, 
the target of ‘Preparation and submission 
of 31 nos. of geological reports’ was 
achieved.
25.6 	 Preparation 
and 
submission 
of 
projects report For UG mines:
As per MoU 2025-26 of CMPDIL, under 
the head ‘Preparation and submission of 
projects report for UG mines (Nos.), Sl. 
No. 11.1’, the target of ‘Preparation and 
submission of 11 nos. of projects report 
for UG mines was achieved.
25.7 	 Preparation 
and 
submission 
of 
projects report For OC mines:
As per MoU 2025-26 of CMPDIL, under 
the head ‘Preparation and submission of 
projects report for OC mines (Nos.), Sl. 
No. 11.2’, the the target of ‘Preparation 
and submission of 19 nos. of projects 
report for OC mines was achieved.
25.8 Acquisition of Data through 2D/3D 
Seismic Survey:
As per MoU 2025-26 of CMPDIL, under 
the head ‘Acquisition of Data through 
2D/3D Seismic Survey (Line KM), Sl. No. 
12.0’, the achievement was ‘Acquisition of 
455.228 Line KM of data through 2D/3D 
Seismic Survey’ against the target of 450 
Line KM.
26	
COAL 
INDIA 
FOUNDATION 
DAY 
CELEBRATED IN CMPDIL.
CMPDIL, 
a 
Mini-Ratna 
Company, 
celebrated the 51st Coal India Foundation 
Day Celebrations with full fervor on 20th 
November, 2025 at CMPDIL sports 
ground, CMPDIL, Ranchi. The celebration 
started with lighting of lamp followed by 
Corporate Song of Coal India Limited. The 
Chief Guest, Shri Sanjay Seth, Hon’ble 
Minister of State for Defence, Government 
of India, remarked in his address that 
completing 50 years is an extraordinary 
milestone for Coal India and CMPDIL. 
He emphasized that high-quality R&D 
and continuous innovation have been 
key to CMPDIL achieving this landmark. 
He also commended the promptness and 
dedication with which CMPDIL has been 
meeting the nation’s energy needs since 
its inception.


152
Shri N. C. Jha, Former Chairman of Coal India Limited and Special Guest of Honour, 
praised CMPDIL for its contributions and emphasized the need for the organization to adopt 
Information Technology more effectively and diversify its services to remain relevant in the 
evolving landscape. He urged CMPDIL to enhance and strengthen its Business Development 
department to tap into the vast opportunities emerging in the mining sector.
Shri Manoj Kumar, Former CMD of CMPDIL, stated that CMPDIL must align its services with 
the nation’s vision of Viksit Bharat and its Net-Zero targets. He added that CMPDIL is fully 
prepared to seize the emerging opportunities to meet the country’s growing energy needs.
Shri Satish Jha, CMD, CMPDIL (Additional Charge) & CMD, ECL in his address, highlighted 
major achievement of CMPDIL in the last one year and said to remain relevant in a rapidly 
changing global landscape, CMPDIL must now diversify aggressively beyond coal. It needs 
to advance into Critical and Rare Earth Elements (REEs), clean energy solutions, and adopt 
advanced technologies such as AI/ML and smart mining to enhance productivity and efficiency. 
This strategic transition is not merely an opportunity but a necessity for CMPDIL to sustain its 
leadership and innovation in the decades ahead.
Shri Sanjay Seth, along with other distinguished dignitaries, presented corporate awards to the 
Departments and Regional Institutes of CMPDIL in recognition of their outstanding performance 
across various operational domains during 2024–25. CMPDIL, RI-V, Bilaspur, received the Best 
Regional Institute Award. The Best Drilling Camp (Hydrostatic category) award was secured by 
Singrauli Camp, RI-VI, Singrauli, while the Best Drilling Camp (Mechanical category) went to 
Talcher Camp, RI-VII, Bhubaneswar for their exceptional achievements.
In the Outside Consultancy Awards category, Opencast Department of CMPDIL(HQ) was 
honoured for achieving the highest value of outside consultancy jobs during 2024–25, while 
the Exploration Department received recognition for serving the highest number of clients in 
the same period.
In the Environment Lab Services category, RI – V, Bilaspur, received the award for their 
excellence in environmental monitoring and laboratory management. Meanwhile, the award 
for Other Lab Services including Blasting was received by RI - VII, Bhubaneswar.
RI-III, Ranchi received the award in in geomatics services for highest percentage revenue/sales 
growth and overall revenue/sales growth in 2024–25. The award for the best Mine Planning 
and Design Department was won by the Opencast Division, CMPDIL(HQ).
In the CSR award category, CMPDIL(HQ), Ranchi achieved award for maximum utilization of 
CSR Budget during 2024-25. Additionally, RI-VII, Bhubaneswar, received the award for highest 
thematic expenditure relative to total expenditure in the CSR category.



	
153


154
On this occasion, Shri Nilendu Kumar Singh, CMD, CCL; Shri Shankar Nagachari, Director 
(Technical/CRD); Shri Rajeev Kumar Sinha, Director (Technical/ES); Shri Nripendra Nath, 
Director (Technical/RD&T)); Ex CMDs, Ex-Directors, Ex-GMs of CMPDIL and CIL & All Regional 
Directors; GMs/HoDs, representatives of CMOAI were also present
27	
ACTIVITIES OF FORUM OF WOMEN IN PUBLIC SECTOR (WIPS) CMPDIL IN 
2025-26.
The office-bearer and executive committee of WIPS for FY 2025-26 are as follows :
	
1.	 Ms Punam Singh, GM (Env) 		
:	
Coordinator
	
2.	 Ms Ruchi S. Baskey, CM (Geo)	
: 	
Addl. Coordinator
	
3.	 Ms Gargi Pandey, Dy.M (Env)	
: 	
Addl. Coordinator
	
4.	 Ms Charu Oberoi, Dy.M (CP)	
: 	
Secretary
	
5.	 Ms Anindita Biswas , CM (Geo)	
: 	
Treasurer
	
6.	 Ms Dipti M Pillai, AM (Env)	 	
: 	
Treasurer
'The activities during FY 2025-26 are as below :
27.1	
UMANG 2.0 - An Exhibition–cum-sale was organized at Rabindra Bhawan, CMPDI, 
Ranchi  from 12th Sep, 2025 up to 15th Sep, 2025
The motive behind this exhibition was to empower the local entrepreneurs and vendors by 
providing a platform to show case and sale their products before the upcoming festive season. 
In this exhibition-cum-sale more than 50 stalls related to fashionable garments, western wear, 
ethic wear, handloom, exquisite jewellery, home decor and handicrafts, apart from mouth 
watering foods were set up.  The event was sucessfully completed and saw wide participation 
from employees and their families members of CMPDIL and CCL.
27.2	
Women Cricket tournament was successfully organized at CMPDIL ground on 28th 
Nov. 2025



	
155
27.3	
Women Volleyball tournament was organized sucessfully at CMPDIL
27.4	
WIPS team, CMPDIL actively participated in 36th National Meet of Forum of Women in Public 
Sector  on 11th & 12th Feb. 2026, held at CIDCO Exhibition and Convention Center, Navi 
Mumbai.


156
27.5	
WIPS, CMPDIL, Ranchi visited  an 
Senior Citizen Home (Old Age Home), 
Bariatu,Ranchi on 08.03.2026 on the 
occasion of International Women’s Day. 
The activity included a small gesture of 
thanks giving by contributing some food 
grains, fruits, vegetables, washing powder 
and celebrated the day by cutting a cake 
with the elderly.
27.6	
WIPS, CMPDIL celebrated international 
Woman's Day on 10th Mar.2026 on the 
theme "Give to Gain".  On this occasion 
various competitions, like painting, rangoli 
making etc. were organized.
27.7	
Celebration of International Women’s 
Day 2026 at CMPDIL Regional Institutes : 
International Women’s day was celebrated 
at all regional institute of CMPDIL. Female



	
157
employees, women contract workers, officials, and senior personnel of the company actively 
participated on this occasion.
28	
E-Auction
	
Earlier, Coal e-Auction was being done only by outside agencies viz. MSTC and Mjunction. CIL 
Board of Directors directed CIL to develop an in-house capacity for conducting coal e-Auction. 
CMPDIL has developed the Coal e-Auction platform for auction of Coal as per the Single 
Window Mode Agnostic Scheme 2022. The development of Portal and its modifications has 
been done by NIC, MeitY, GoI, who is our technology partner for this project. CMPDIL has 
started conducing e-Auctions for coal from 2023. CMPDIL has successfully conducted 237 
auctions for all subsidiaries of CIL for a total quantity of 130 Million Tonne during the F.Y. 
2024-25. In December 2024, changes have been made in SWMA scheme 2022. Accordingly, 
the portal has been developed and is conducting auctions as per modified scheme. In the 
newly developed platform CMPDIL is conducting 25% of the total SWMA auctions as pre order 
dated 24.09.2025 of CIL. After re-development of portal, CMPDIL has successfully conducted 
36 auctions for all subsidiaries of CIL for a total quantity of 28.10 Million Tonne during the F.Y. 
2025-26. In the developed portal, bidders are able to see and refer their bids with time punch 
as the same is being stored in their dashboard for each activity done by them in the live portal. 
The newly developed system is more user friendly and scope for making error by a bidder 
during live auction is eliminated. In the newly developed platform, there will be no intervention 
from administrator side either by CMPDIL or NIC for making any alteration in the auction 
process till successful completion of the auction.
29	
CONTRACT MANAGEMENT 
	
The Contract Management Cell (CMC) Department is responsible for tendering and award 
of exploration activities and associated services. During FY 2025-26, the Department 
demonstrated effective performance through streamlined tender processing, timely bid 
finalisation and prompt issuance of Letters of Award for major exploration works. 
	
The procurement target for the CMC department through tendering was Rs.225 Cr against 
which the department has achieved Rs.275 Cr. The combined awarded value for Coring 
drilling is 5.08 lakh meter and for Geophysical logging is 4.08 lakh meter. Out of Rs.275 Cr, 
Rs.194 Cr is awarded to MSE bidders which is approximately 70% of the total procurement 
value. Procurement of about Rs.121 lakh was done from women MSE entrepreneur, thereby 
reflecting continued emphasis on inclusive procurement.
30	
DIRECTOR'S RESPONSIBILITY STATEMENT:
30.1	
In the preparation of the annual accounts, the applicable accounting standards had been 
followed along with proper explanation relating to material departures.
30.2	
The Directors had selected such accounting policies and applied them consistently and made 
judgments and estimates that are reasonable and prudent so as to give a true and fair view of 
the state of affairs of the company at the end of the financial year and of the profit or loss of the 
company for that period.
30.3	
The Directors had taken proper and sufficient care for the maintenance of adequate accounting 
records in accordance with the provisions of this Act for safeguarding the assets of the company


158
and for preventing and detecting fraud and other irregularities.
30.4	
The Directors had prepared the Annual Accounts on a going concern basis.
30.5	
Internal Financial Control have been laid down and that such controls are adequate and were 
operating effectively during the year ended 31th March, 2026
30.6	
The Directors confirmed that they had devised proper system to ensure compliance with the 
provisions of all applicable laws and that such systems were adequate and operating effectively.
AUDITORS: 
On the advice of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India M/s.Deoki Bijay & Co., Chartared 
Accountants, Ranchi were appointed as Statutory Auditors of the Company for the Financial Year 
2025-26. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT: 
Your Directors are grateful to the Government of India particularly the Ministry of Coal, Coal India 
Ltd., and its Subsidiaries, State Governments and other Public Sector Undertakings with whom your 
Company has to work in close contact for their co-operation and encouragement in fulfilling the tasks 
of the Company. We are thankful to our esteemed clients for the confidence reposed in us and the 
patronage extended to us and to the dedicated employees of the company. 
ADDENDUM : 
Information  as required to be given in the Directors’ Report under Section 134(3) (m) of the Companies 
Act, 2013 on conservation of Energy, Technology absorption and Foreign Exchange earnings and 
outgo,  Research and Development, CEO and CFO certification, Extract of Annual Return under 
section 92 of the Companies Act, 2013, Auditor reports on compliance on Corporate Governance, 
the reports of Statutory Auditor and Management replies, Secretarial Auditor’s Report and replies 
of management  Comments of the Comptroller & Auditor General of India under section 143 of the 
Companies Act, 2013, reports on MoU 2025-26 and Information on details of remuneration etc. of 
Managerial Personnel are also Annexed to this report.
For and on behalf of the Board of Directors 
	
	
Sd/- 
	
	
(Chaudhari Shivraj Singh) 
	
	
Chairman-cum-Managing Director 
Place : Ranchi 
Date : 10.07.2026



	
159
ADDENDUM – I
ANNEXURE TO DIRECTORS’ REPORT
Information as required to be given in the Directors’ Report under Section 134(3) (m) of the 
Companies Act, 2013 read with the – matters to be included in Board’s Report, Rule- 8 regarding 
conservation of energy, technology absorption and foreign exchange earning and outgo.
A.	
CONSERVATION OF ENERGY INITIATIVES TO REDUCE CARBON FOOTPRINTS
	
CMPDIL has undertaken energy conservation studies in 2025-26 and conducted Diesel 
Audit & Benchmarking of specific diesel consumption as well as Electrical Energy Audit and 
Benchmarking of specific electrical energy consumption in various opencast and underground 
mines situated in different subsidiaries of Coal India Limited by Bureau of Energy Efficiency 
(BEE) accredited Energy Auditors.
	
In Diesel Benchmarking studies conducted in various coalfields of CIL, following broad heads 
are adopted for diesel conservation:
• 
Identification & Minimization of leakage and adopting preventive maintenance measures for 
HEMM deployed
• 
Speed optimization of HEMM considering haul road conditions
• 
Time study to minimize idle hours and preventing unnecessary movement of HEMM
• 
Comparison with CMPDIL planning & design norms, 0.1 ltr/bhp-hr for track mounted, 0.06 
ltr/bhp- hr for wheel mounted and 0.054 ltr/bhp-hr for electric wheel mounted HEMM
	
In Electrical Energy Audit & Benchmarking studies conducted in various coalfields of CIL, trend 
analysis based on last three (3) years historical data and electrical measurements carried out 
during field visit to underground and opencast mines, following energy conservation methods 
are adopted:
• 
Demand side management
• 
Reduction of transmission & distribution losses
• 
Power factor improvement
• 
Efficient illumination system
• 
Reduction of transformation losses by reorganization of transformers
• 
Installation of energy meters for energy monitoring
• 
Energy conservation measures in pumping system
	
For Energy Audit and Energy Benchmarking studies conducted by BEE accredited Energy 
Auditors, please refer table as given below:


160
(A1) Energy Conservation initiatives taken up by CMPDIL for the year 2025-26
 A
Diesel Audit and Benchmarking
Diesel 
Consumption (kL)
Proposed 
Saving Potential
1.
Annual benchmarking of 8 OCPs identified by ECL
28477
1218 K Litre/yr
2.
Annual benchmarking of 11 OCPs identified by BCCL
26509
1159 K Litre/yr
3.
Annual benchmarking of 28 OCPs identified by CCL
49878
2190 K Litre/yr
4.
Annual benchmarking of 14 OCPs identified by WCL
49035
2217 K Litre/yr
5.
Annual benchmarking of 03 OCPs identified by SECL
81395
3599 K Litre/yr
6.
Annual benchmarking of 10 OCPs identified by NCL
145085
6438 K Litre/yr
7.
Annual benchmarking of 11 OCPs identified by MCL
40270
1781 K Litre/yr
  B Electrical Energy Audit and Benchmarking studies carried during 2025-26
1.
Electrical Energy Audit and Benchmarking Reports for following projects of CCL.
i)	  Urimari OC, Barkasayal Area
ii)	  Sirka OC, Argada Area 
iii)   Karma OC, Kuju Area 
iv)   AAD OC, Dhori Area
2
i)     Energy Audit of official complex of CMPDIL HQ as a part of GREEN MISSION.
(A2) Mine Illumination Survey Report taken up by CMPDI for the year 2024-25
Sl No.
Job Description
1.
Illumination Survey of Jayant OCP, NCL
B.	
SOLAR POWER PLANT INITIATIVES
	 Under Feasibility/Planning
	
•	
55 MW J&K Area, SECL
	
•	
4.68 MW Belgaria, BCCL
	
•	
6 MW Amlori, NCL
	
•	
6 MW Patherkheda, WCL
	
•	
62 MW Johilla, SECL
	
•	
12.5 Sodepur, SECL
	
•	
0.2 MW Various Area, CCL
	
•	
62 MW- MCL
	 Under Tendering
	
•	
25 MW Dughda washery-II, BCCL
	 Under Contract Agreement
	
•	
13 MW Ground mounted SPP, NK Area,CCL



	
161
	 Commissioned
	
•	
1.02 MW SPP at Barkasayal Area, CCL.
	
•	
1.3 MW- IWSS khadia,Bina Kakari NCL
	
•	
5 MW Bala kudra OB top Barka sayal, CCL.
C.	
FOREIGN EXCHANGE AND OUTGO
(Rs. in crore)
Sl. No. Particulars
2025-26
1.
Earning
NIL
2.
Expenditure on Foreign currency
5.1
D.	
CONSERVATION OF ENERGY
(i)	 R&D project titled “A pilot project on underground coal gasification (UCG) to establish 
Technology in Indian Geo-Mining conditions (Phase-II).”- CMPDIL (HQ), Ranchi, ECL, 
Sanctoria and M/s Ergo Exergy Technologies Inc (EETI), Canada 
•	
To design, construct, and operate a Phase-2 Underground Coal Gasification (UCG) Pilot 
Plant adapted for Indian coal to evaluate its commercial viability.
ii)	 R&D project titled “Bi-facial Perovskite Module - Leading to 4-T Perovskite-Si Tandem 
Structure”- IIT Bombay.
•	
The project aims to achieve ~ 20% efficiency at the module level and ~ 24% at the cell 
level with projected stability for ~ 10 years. The reliability of the devices will be measured 
as per the ISOS protocol. It is planned to deliver a prototype of the developed module at 
the TRL4/5.
•	
It further aims to realize 4T tandem devices.  It is expected to develop a 4T Si-Perovskite 
tandem structure with a projected efficiency of >25% at the module level and >30% at the 
cell level. It is planned to deliver a prototype of the developed module at the TRL3/4.
E.	
TECHNOLOGY ABSORPTION 
The R&D in coal sector is mainly for improvement of efficiency parameters in mining operations 
including mine safety, coal beneficiation/utilization, protection of mine environment and ecology 
and development of clean coal technology etc.
CMPDIL being a nodal agency and research organisation, has taken many technological 
initiatives in various fields across its total operational activities.
•	
The latest version of Geovia Minex, Data Mine, Vulcan, Carlson software for mine 
planning have been introduced. This provides best resource planning through pit design, 
pit optimization, scheduling of resources and dumps, etc. Also, Geo-technical software/
tools from Rocscience Inc. for analysing rock and soil slopes stability has been procured.
•	
Commissioning of the Large Direct Shear Machine (Largest in India) with 2500 kN 
Normal Shear Load Capacity through R & D Project (Designed in collaboration with IIT 
Delhi) and establishment of a Geotechnical Lab. 
•	
The samples from 23 mines of NCL, SECL, CCL, MCL, BCCL and NTPC have been 
tested and used in the scientific study reports for Slope stability since the commissioning.


162
•	
47 numbers of departmental Surface Miners are in operation in several opencast mines 
of CIL to eliminate drilling and blasting and also for facilitating selective mining.
•	
A study on use of Vibro Ripper in opencast mines has been done recently. From this 
study it has been that Vibro Ripper is suitable at places where drilling & blasting is not 
permitted / desired due to environmental, safety or other reasons. Presently they are 
deployed in Kaniha & Hingula mines in MCL and Gevra in SECL.
•	
GPS/ GPRS based Vehicle Tracking System [VTS] in coal transporting vehicles have 
been introduced to prevent theft and pilferage of coal. 
•	
RFID, CCTV & Boom Barrier based Weight Monitoring and Control System has been 
introduced. It has ensured Real Time transmission of coal weighment data to the Central 
Server. This has enhanced transparency in the system as well as helped reducing theft 
of coal during transit.
•	
Operator Independence Truck Dispatch System (OITDS)- Automatic allocation of 
dumpers to shovels to reduce cycle time and cost instead of presently just tracking of 
vehicles in most of the mines along with Real Time Vehicle Health Monitoring System, 
VIMS and Fuel Management System (FMS) are being used.
•	
Fixed type Automatic sprinkler system for dust suppression in Open Cast mines- 
Continuous monitoring of pump drive namely Start, Stop, Trip etc. is introduced through 
R&D efforts.
•	
Hydrostatic drills with PCD bits for enhancing the productivity of exploratory drills have 
been introduced.
•	
CMPDIL has recently introduced 2D/3D seismic survey on wide scale for coal exploration 
work using state of art seismograph and modern seismic sources (like vibrator/ explosive 
etc) along with optimised drilling work as per terms of ISP, 2022.
•	
CMPDIL is using state of art Paradigm software along with in-house developed software 
“SPE” for processing and interpretation of seismic data, which generates better structural 
information of sub-surface by imagining technology. 
•	
CMPDIL is Principal Implementing Agency (PIA) for the development of CBM in CIL 
leasehold areas i.e. BCCL, ECL & SECL. 
•	
Jharia CBM Block-I (BCCL leasehold area) has been awarded to M/s Prabha Energy 
Limited (PEL) for extraction of CBM on revenue sharing basis. The Block is currently 
under Exploration Phase. Drilling of 05 Exploratory Coreholes and 04 Test Wells under 
Minimum Work Programme (MWP) have been completed. Drilling of 05th Test Well is 
under progress.
•	
Clean Energy Lab under Promotional/Regional/Detailed Exploration Programme 
completed field desorption studies in 19 boreholes for CBM and 5 boreholes for Shale 
Gas.
CBM specific analysis have been carried out for CIL Subsidiaries and outside clients.
F.	
BRIEF OUTCOMES OF MAJOR RESEARCH PROJECTS COMPLETED DURING 2025-26:
1)  
Development of Synthetic Lightweight Aggregates as Backfilling Material using 
Hydraulic Stowing Method:
	
In the project, lightweight aggregates were developed using waste material including



	
163
municipal waste, for utilization as backfilling material during hydraulic stowing. Sustainable 
Lightweight Aggregates (SLAs) demonstrated performance comparable to sand and 
superior to raw fly ash, making them effective and eco-friendly backfilling materials. 
Among the tested compositions, 85FA15MIX emerged as the optimum backfill material, 
achieving the highest strength, excellent durability, and low permeability. The material also 
satisfied environmental safety requirements, with heavy metal concentrations remaining 
within permissible limits and mercury levels substantially reduced compared to raw fly ash. 
Overall, 85FA15MIX offers an ideal combination of mechanical performance, durability, 
and environmental sustainability for mine backfilling applications.
2)	
Assessing the Abiotic and Biotic Factors in Pit Lakes for Sustainable Management 
of Water and Environment:
	
The findings showed that pit lake water at   two pit lakes in CCL (Bhurkhunda) and one 
pit lake in MCL (Basundhara area, east) does not contain any specific pollutants that 
require new treatment methods, and existing water treatment methods are sufficient to 
produce potable water. The pit lakes showed progressive ecological development with high 
biodiversity and valuable ecosystem services, despite not yet meeting Ramsar wetland 
criteria. 
	
Further key aspects including catchment engineering, land sloping, and pit lake bank 
stabilisation, which must include vegetation to stabilise surface materials and provide 
shelter from wind- and water-erosive forces shall be part of mine closure. This will help 
in improving vegetation diversity and establish a self-sustainable ecosystem, ultimately 
maintaining the site's aesthetics.
3) 	
Indigenous Development of NIR spectroscope for instant prediction of Coal 
Quality Parameters:
	
The project has successfully developed an indigenous NIR (Hyperspectral) imaging camera 
with a high prediction accuracy of 98.9–99.9% for coal quality assessment. The camera 
was validated using SCCL coal samples and demonstrated satisfactory performance. The 
technology enables rapid, non-destructive determination of key coal quality parameters, 
including ash, moisture, volatile matter, fixed carbon, calorific value, and sulphur content. 
Its adoption in coal and power industries can significantly reduce dependence on time-
consuming laboratory testing, leading to faster and more efficient quality monitoring.
4) 	
Use of Microseismicity as a tool for underground mines hazard monitoring with 
the motive to enhance safety and production:
	
The project successfully demonstrated real-time microseismic monitoring of underground 
coal mine depillaring operations, enabling effective tracking of stress redistribution, fracture 
propagation, and roof-fall precursors. Integrated spectral, temporal, and spatial correlation 
analyses clearly distinguished true seismic events from operational noise, significantly 
improving event detection reliability. Accurate event localization, magnitude estimation, 
and hazard assessment were achieved using advanced processing tools and a dedicated 
visualization platform with real-time alerts. The study established threshold indicators 
for impending roof falls and confirmed the effectiveness of microseismic monitoring for 
ground control and safety management. The developed framework has strong potential 
for replication across CIL subsidiaries, supporting AI-based automated warning systems, 
enhanced hazard management, reduced downtime, and safer underground mining 
operations. Future implementation of microseismic monitoring from the initial stages of


164
mining can further improve risk assessment and align Indian coal mines with global best 
practices.
5) 	
Establishment of Geo-thermal energy (20KW Cap) power generation Pilot Project 
at Manuguru area of SCCL Command area based on closed loop Binary Organic 
Rankine Cycle Process technology:
	
In the project, 5KW pilot plant has been established at Manuguru, SCCL for utilizing the 
geothermal energy.
6) 	
Recycling Coal Mine Overburden To Reuse As A Value Added Building Material 
To Promote A Circular Economy:
	
Structural and non-structural building elements have been developed during the project 
using coal mine overburden, and a model unit has been constructed at CMPDIL campus, 
Ranchi utilizing the developed building elements.  
 7) 
A Pilot Project on Underground Coal Gasification (UCG) to establish the 
technology in Indian geo- miningconditions:                                                                                                                  
	
A UCG R&D Project titled “A pilot project on Underground Coal Gasification (UCG) to 
establish technology in Indian geo-mining conditions” is being implemented by CMPDIL, 
ECL and Ergo Exergy Technologies Inc. (EETI), Canada.
	
The project comprises of Two (02) Phases. Phase-I involving Site Selection, Characterization 
& Pre-Feasibility Study successfully completed on 31st  May, 2025.
	
Phase-II of the Project comprising of Pilot Plant Design, Construction, Commissioning, 
Operations, Shutdown and Post-Shutdown Monitoring commenced on 20th June, 2025 
and currently under implementation.
8) 	
Development of guideline for prevention & mitigation of explosion hazard by 
risk assessment and determination of explosibility of Indian coal incorporating 
risk based mine emergency evacuation and re-entry protocol:
	
Risk assessment findings: Existing systems lack a risk-based approach, real-time 
monitoring, proper zoning, methane drainage, and effective explosion prevention/
inertization measures.Coal behaviour insights: Wide variation in self-heating susceptibility 
(R70), thermal runaway potential, and gas evolution; specific seams show ultra-high 
reactivity and identifiable indicator gases.Petrography linkage: Coal composition strongly 
influences heating/explosibility, with strong statistical correlation between petrographic 
properties and combustion behaviour.Explosion studies: CFD simulations established key 
explosion parameters and confirmed linkage between explosibility, spontaneous heating, 
and gassiness; inert materials significantly reduce explosion severity.Experimental 
gaps: Some planned facilities (20L chamber, 30m tube) were not operational; alternative 
simulations and furnace studies were used instead.Emergency response outcome: A risk-
based evacuation and re-entry decision support protocol was developed to improve timely 
and safer disaster response.
9)	
Indigenous Development of Monolithic Perovskite Module Manufacturing by 
Printing:
	
A 45-day outdoor study confirmed that perovskite solar modules can reliably generate 
power under real-world conditions.Performance showed a strong correlation with sunlight 
and remained stable across daily variations.Minor changes during operation had negligible



	
165
impact on overall output and long-term performance.With proper encapsulation and 
monitoring, modules exhibited low degradation and high reproducibility.Findings validate 
the practical field potential of perovskite technology and the importance of outdoor testing.
10)	
Development of guidelines for delineation of water-stressed areas and designing 
of environmental friendly water storage structure for meeting the water needs in 
mining areas:
	
Mining within a 0.5 km radius contributes to water stress, but geological and hydrogeological 
factors (low infiltration, steep slopes, poor soil permeability, high demand, weak rainwater 
harvesting) are equally significant.Targeted water storage structures at Tilaiya (Barka 
Sayal), Ara (Magadh), and Kumarang Kalan (Amrapali) are proposed to improve recharge 
and availability.The approach is scalable and adaptable, supporting groundwater 
replenishment and pond rejuvenation.Overall, it enables sustainable water management 
and long-term water security in mining-affected regions.
11) 
Up gradation of high ash Indian coal through physical and chemical beneficiation:
	
Developed a novel ADMFB-based dry separator for high-ash Indian coal, suited for water-
scarce regions.Demonstrated effective treatment of coarser coal fractions with satisfactory 
yield and efficiency.A hybrid approach (ADMFB + froth flotation) improves performance 
over standalone methods.Enables reduced ash content and better resource utilization, 
offering a sustainable beneficiation alternative.Shows potential for pilot-scale adoption in 
CIL collieries to enhance coal quality.
12) 
Real-time energy efficient cyber-physical intelligent system for mine slope 
health monitoring
	
Developed a real-time dump slope stability monitoring system using indigenous MEMS-
based sensors for vibration and displacement tracking Built a cost-effective, energy-
efficient solution with in-house PCB design and solar-powered sensor nodes.Enabled 
wireless data transfer via ZigBee mesh network integrated with MQTT for cloud monitoring.
Successfully deployed in the field with continuous operation and centralized data analysis.
Demonstrated reliable early warning alerts and 3D visualization for slope deformation 
monitoring.
13)	
Assessment of safe parting thickness and optimal goaf edge support requirement 
for extraction of pillars under soft cover: 
	
The project objectives of assessment of safe parting through numerical modelling and field 
instrumentation has been executed. An extensive numerical modelling study has been 
done to simulate the mechanics of load transfer of soft cover and its effect on caving 
mechanism of strata and failure of the parting strata for cover depth varying from 150-
350m, ratio of immediate and main roof thickness varying from 0.5-2, and ratio of parting 
strata to soft cover varying from 0.5-3 across soft to hard strata conditions.The work 
considered modelling of progressive face advance to observe the major caving of roof, and 
progressive goaf settlement to observe the settlement behaviour of parting and resultant 
load transfer at the face.The field validation has been done by rock instrumentation in 
panel B 20 A of Khottadih Colliery wherein the thickness of soft cover was 90 to 100 m, 
hard cover was 25, 45, 65 m while the cover depth was 150, 250, 350 m.


166
ADDENDUM- II



	
167
ADDENDUM – III
Report on Corporate Governance
1.	
A brief statement on Company’s philosophy on code of Governance
	
The Company firmly believes that good Corporate Governance is essential for achieving 
long-term corporate goals and enhancing stakeholder value. The philosophy of the Company 
in relation to Corporate Governance is to ensure transparency, integrity, accountability, 
confidentiality, control, social responsibility, disclosures and reporting that confirms fully to 
laws, regulations and guidelines.
	
For effective implementation of the Corporate Governance practices, the company has a well-
defined policy that is adopted and is available on website of the Company (https://www.cmpdi.
co.in/en/investor/company-policies).
	
The Company complies with the applicable provisions relating to Corporate Governance 
under the Companies Act, 2013, SEBI (Listing Obligations and Disclosure Requirements) 
Regulations, 2015, wherever applicable, and the guidelines issued by the Government of India 
from time to time. 
2.	
Board of Directors
	
The business of the company is managed by the Board of Directors. The President determines, 
from time to time, the number of Directors of the company. The Directors are not required to 
hold any qualification shares. The Chairman, Functional Directors, Part-time official Directors 
and Part-time Non-Official Directors are appointed by the President of India and they are paid 
salary, allowances, sitting fees etc. as determined by the President of India subject to provisions 
of the Companies Act, 2013 and terms and conditions of the appointment order.
	
Size of the Board:
	
In terms of the Article of Association of the company, strength of our Board shall not be 
less than 3 Directors and not more than 15 Directors. These Directors may be Whole Time 
Directors /Functional Directors, Part-Time Official Directors or Part-Time Non-Official Directors/
Independent Directors.
(A)	
Composition and category of Directors:
	
As on 31st March, 2026, the Board of Directors of CMPDIL comprises of 6 (Six) Directors 
out of which four are Whole-time Directors including the Chairman-cum-Managing Director 
and two Part-time Official Directors (Nominee Directors). The Board is headed by an 
Executive Chairman, Shri Chaudhari Shivraj Singh.
	
The Independent Directors are yet to be appointed by the Ministry of Coal, Govt. of India 
after the cessation of office of the Independent Directors appointed earlier. As such the 
guidelines on Corporate Governance in respect of composition of Board could be followed 
only on appointment of the Independent Directors.
	
The composition of Board of Directors as on 31st March, 2026 is as follows:
	 I.  	
WHOLE-TIME DIRECTORS
	 A.	
CHAIRMAN-CUM-MANAGING DIRECTOR	
1.	
SHRI CHAUDHARI SHIVRAJ SINGH


168
	 B.	
FUNCTIONAL DIRECTORS	
1.	
SHRI AJAY KUMAR
2.	
SHRI RAJEEV KUMAR SINHA
3.	
SHRI NRIPENDRA NATH
	 II. 	
PART–TIME OFFICIAL DIRECTORS/ NOMINEE DIRECTOR
1.   SHRI MUKESH AGRAWAL
2.   SHRI MARAPALLY VENKATESHWARLU	
	 (B)	 Attendance of each Director at the Board Meetings and last AGM.
Details of number of Board meetings attended by each Director are as follows:
Sl.
No.
Name of Directors
Designation
Board Meetings 
Attended 
at last 
AGM
Number 
of other 
Directorship 
as on 
31.03.2026 in 
Listed Public 
Companies
Held 
during 
their 
tenure
Attended
Functional Directors
1.
Shri Chaudhari 
Shivraj Singh
Chairman-cum-
Managing Director
8
8
-
-
2.
Shri Satish Jha
Chairman-cum-
Managing Director- 
Additional Charge
1
1
-
-
3.
Shri Manoj Kumar
Chairman-cum-
Managing Director
11
11
Yes
-
4.
Shri Ajay kumar
Director (Technical)
20
18
Yes
-
5.
Shri Rajeev Kumar 
Sinha
Director (Technical)
9
9
-
-
6.
Shri Nripendra Nath
Director (Technical)
9
9
-
-
7.
Shri Shankar 
Nagachari
Director (Technical)
15
15
Yes
-
Part-time official Directors
8.
Shri Mukesh Agrawal
Director (Finance), 
Coal India Limited
20
20
Yes
1
9.
Shri Marapally 
Venkateshwarlu
Director (T/NA), 
Ministry of Coal
20
20
Yes
-
	
Sl. No.8 was appointed as Nominee Director from Coal India Limited w.e.f 17.10.2024
	
Sl. No.9 was appointed as Govt. Nominee Director from Ministry of Coal w.e.f.01.01.2025.
(C)	
Number of Board Meetings held and dates on which held	
	
The Board of Directors is the supreme body of the company which oversees the overall function 
of the company. 20 (Twenty) Board meetings were held during the financial year 2025-26.
Sl. No.
Number of Meeting
Dates
Day
Place of Meeting
1.
288th
10.04.2025
Thursday
Ranchi
2.
289th
21.04.2025
Monday
Ranchi
3.
290th
30.04.2025
Wednesday
Ranchi



	
169
Sl. No.
Number of Meeting
Dates
Day
Place of Meeting
4.
291st 
22.05.2025
Thursday
Ranchi
5.
292nd
24.05.2025
Saturday
Ranchi
6.
293rd
26.05.2025
Monday
Ranchi
7.
294th 
11.07.2025
Friday
Ranchi
8.
295th
18.07.2025
Friday
Kolkata
9.
296th 
08.08.2025
Friday
Ranchi
10.
297th
13.09.2025
Saturday
Ranchi
11
298th 
25.10.2025 &
26.10.2025
Saturday and
Sunday
Guwahati
12
299th
25.11.2025
Tuesday
Sanctoria
13
300th
20.01.2026
Tuesday
Ranchi
14
301st 
23.02.2026
Monday
Mumbai
15
302nd
26.02.2026
Thursday
Ranchi
16
303rd
10.03.2026
Tuesday
Ranchi
17
304th
12.03.2026
Thursday
Ranchi
18
305th
13.03.2026
Friday
Ranchi
19
306th
24.03.2026
Tuesday
Ranchi
20
307th
25.03.2026
Wednesday
Ranchi
(D)	
No. of Equity Shares held by Non – Executive Directors as on 31st March, 
2026
	
The Non –Executive Directors of the company does not hold any shares of CMPDIL as on 31st 
March 2026.
(E)	
Web link of Familiarization Programme imparted to Independent Directors.
	
The Independent Directors are yet to be appointed by the Ministry of Coal, Govt. of India 
after the cessation of office of the Independent Directors appointed earlier. As such the 
Familiarization Programme to Independent Directors could be followed only on appointment 
of the Independent Directors. The company has well defined “Policy for Familiarization 
Programme to Independent Directors” posted on website of the company https://www.cmpdi.
co.in/en/investor/company-policies.
(F)	
Chart / Matrix setting out the skills / expertise / competence of the board of 
directors
	
As stipulated by SEBI (LODR) Regulations 2015, the list of core skills/expertise/competence 
of the Board of Directors identified by the Board of Directors as required in the context of its 
business and sector for it to function effectively and those actually available with the Board are 
as under: -
	
(i)	
Executive Leadership 
	
(ii)	
Mining & Exploration
	
(iii)	
Engineering & Project Management
	
(iv)	
Finance & Accounts


170
	
(v)	
Corporate Governance & Compliance
	
(vi)	
Strategy & Business Management
	
(vii)	
Human Resource Management
	
(viii)	
Sustainability, Environment & Safety
	
(ix)	
Risk Management & Internal Control
	
The names of directors who have such skills / expertise / competence as required to be 
disclosed along with the above matrix for Financial Year 2025-26 as under: -
Name of Director
Executive 
Leadership
Mining & Exploration
Engineering 
& Project 
Management
Finance & Accounts
Corporate 
Governance & 
Compliance
Strategy & Business 
Management
Human Resource 
Management
Sustainability, 
Environment & 
Safety
Risk Management & 
Internal Control
Shri Chaudhari 
Shivraj Singh









Shri Ajay 
Kumar









Shri Rajeev 
Kumar Sinha









Shri Nripendra 
Nath









Shri Mukesh 
Agrawal









Shri Marapally 
Venkateshwarlu









(G)	
Disclosure of interest as on 31st March, 2026.
Sl.  
No.
Name of the
Directors
Company in which 
interested
Nature of Interest i.e. 
Chairman,  Director, 
Manager & Secretary
Functional Directors
1.
Shri Chaudhari Shivraj Singh
NIL
-
2.
Shri Ajay Kumar
NIL
-
3.
Shri Rajeev Kumar Sinha
NIL
-
4.
Shri Nripendra Nath
NIL
-
Part-time official Directors
4.
Shri Mukesh Agrawal
1.	 Coal India Limited
2.	 Eastern 
Coalfields 
Limited
3.	 Coal Lignite Urja Vikas 
Private Limited
1.	 Director (Finance) & 
Shareholder
2.	 Director
3.	 Chairman
5
Shri Marapally Venkateshwarlu
NIL
-



	
171
(I).	
Information placed before the Board meeting 
	
Board has complete access to any information within the Company. The information 
supplied to Board includes:
o	
Capital and Revenue Budgets.
o	
Quarterly and Annual Financial results of the Company.
o	
Periodic Review of the Performance of the Company.
o	
Periodic Review of availability & utilization of Heavy Machines.
o	
Periodic Report on Compliance of applicable Laws.
o	
Annual Report, Directors’ Report etc.
o	
Minutes of the meeting of Audit Committee, CSR Committee, Nomination and 
Remuneration Committee and Risk Management Committee.
o	
Award of large contracts / Agreements
o	
Disclosure of interest by Directors about Directorship and position occupied by 
them in other companies
o	
Declaration of Independence by Independent Director.
o	
Manpower Budget.
o	
Any other materially important information
3. 	
Audit Committee:
A.	
Brief description of terms of reference
	
CMPDIL has formed an Audit Committee pursuant to resolution of Board of Directors in its 
121st meeting dated October 19, 2001 as per the requirements of Companies Act, 1956. 
The Audit Committee was last reconstituted on November 25, 2025 consisting of Two 
Nominee Directors and two Functional Directors. CFO is permanent invitee and Company 
Secretary is the Secretary to the Committee.
	
The primary function of the Audit Committee is to assist the Board of Directors in fulfilling 
its oversight responsibilities by reviewing the financial report, the Company’s system of 
internal control regarding finance, Accounting and the Company’s auditing, accounting 
and financial reporting process generally.
	
The Audit Committee reviews reports of the Internal Auditors, meets Statutory Auditors 
and discusses their findings, suggestions and other related matters and reviews major 
accounting policies followed by the Company.
B.	
Scope of Audit Committee:
	
The scope and functions of the Audit Committee are in accordance with Section 177 of 
the Companies Act, 2013, Regulation 18 of the SEBI (LODR) Regulations, 2015 and in 
accordance with the guidelines on Corporate Governance of CPSEs issued by the Ministry 
of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises, Department of Public Enterprises.
	
The Audit Committee shall have powers, including the following:
(1)	 To investigate any activity within its terms of reference
(2)	 To seek information from any employee


172
(3)	 To obtain outside legal or other professional advice; and
(4)	 To secure attendance of outsiders with relevant expertise, if it considers necessary; 
and
(5)	 Such other powers as may be prescribed under the Companies Act, 2013, and 
SEBI Listing Regulations.
	
The role of the Audit Committee shall include the following:
(1)	 Oversight of financial reporting process and the disclosure of financial information 
relating to the Company to ensure that the financial statements are correct, 
sufficient and credible;
(2)	 To take note and recording of the appointment and the terms of appointment, re-
appointment, replacement, remuneration of the auditors of the Company by the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India (“CAG”).
(3)	 Recommending to the Board the fixation of audit fees, based on the order/
instructions of the CAG;
(4)	 Approval of payment to statutory auditors for any other services rendered by the 
statutory auditors;
(5)	 Reviewing, with the management, the annual financial statements and auditor's 
report thereon before submission to the Board for approval, with particular 
reference to:
a.	
Matters required to be included in the director’s responsibility statement to 
be included in the Board’s report in terms of clause (c) of sub-section 3 of 
section 134 of the Companies Act, 2013
b.	
Changes, if any, in accounting policies and practices and reasons for the 
same
c.	
Major accounting entries involving estimates based on the exercise of 
judgment by management
d.	
Significant adjustments made in the financial statements arising out of audit 
findings
e.	
Compliance with listing and other legal requirements relating to financial 
statements
f.	
Disclosure of any related party transactions; and
g.	
Modified opinion(s) in the draft audit report.
(6)	 Reviewing, with the management, the quarterly, half-yearly and annual financial 
statements before submission to the Board for approval;
(7)	 Reviewing with the management, performance of Statutory and Internal Auditors 
and adequacy of the internal control systems.
(8)	 Reviewing, with the management, the statement of uses / application of funds 
raised through an issue (public issue, rights issue, preferential issue, etc.), the 
statement of funds utilized for purposes other than those stated in the issue 
document / prospectus / notice, and making appropriate recommendations to 
the Board to take up steps in this matter. This also includes monitoring the use/



	
173
application of the funds raised through the proposed initial public offer by the 
Company;
(9)	 Reviewing and monitoring the auditor’s independence and performance, and 
effectiveness of audit process;
(10)	Approval of any subsequent modification of transactions of the Company with 
related parties and omnibus approval for related party transactions proposed to 
be entered into by the Company, subject to the conditions as may be prescribed
	
Explanation: The term "related party transactions" shall have the same meaning 
as provided in Clause 2(zc) of the SEBI Listing Regulations and/or the applicable 
Accounting Standards and/or the Companies Act, 2013.
(11)	Reviewing, at least on a quarterly basis, the details of related party transactions 
entered into by the Company pursuant to each of the omnibus approvals given;
(12)	Scrutiny of inter-corporate loans and investments;
(13)	Valuation of undertakings or assets of the Company, wherever it is necessary;
(14)	Evaluation of internal financial controls and risk management systems;
(15)	Reviewing, with the management, performance of statutory and internal auditors, 
adequacy of the internal control systems;
(16)	Reviewing the adequacy of internal audit function, if any, including the structure 
of the internal audit department, staffing and seniority of the official heading the 
department, reporting structure coverage and frequency of internal audit;
(17)	Discussion with internal auditors of any significant findings and follow up thereon;
(18)	Reviewing the findings of any internal investigations by the internal auditors into 
matters where there is suspected fraud or irregularity or a failure of internal control 
systems of a material nature and reporting the matter to the Board;
(19)	Discussion with statutory auditors before the audit commences, about the nature 
and scope of audit as well as post-audit discussion to ascertain any area of 
concern;
(20)	Recommending to the board of directors the appointment and removal of the 
external auditor, fixation of audit fees and approval for payment for any other 
services;
(21)	Looking into the reasons for substantial defaults in the payment to depositors, 
debenture holders, shareholders (in case of non-payment of declared dividends) 
and creditors;
(22)	Reviewing and monitoring the functioning of the whistle blower mechanism;
(23)	Monitoring the end use of funds raised through public offers and related matters;
(24)	Overseeing the vigil mechanism established by the Company, with the chairman 
of the Audit Committee, providing for adequate safeguards against victimization 
of employees and directors who avail of the vigil mechanism and directly hearing 
grievances of victimization of employees and directors, who used vigil mechanism 
to report genuine concerns in appropriate and exceptional cases;
(25)	Approval of appointment of chief financial officer (i.e., the whole-time finance


174
Director or any other person heading the finance function or discharging that 
function) after assessing the qualifications, experience and background, etc. of 
the candidate;
(26)	To review the follow up action on the audit observations of CAG Audit.
(27)	To review the follow up action taken on the recommendations of Committee on 
Public Undertakings (COPU)of the Parliament.
(28)	Provide an open avenue of communication between the independent auditor, 
internal auditor and the Board of Directors
(29)	The Audit Committee shall mandatorily review the following information:
I.	
Management discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of 
operations.
II.	
Management letters / letter of internal control weaknesses issued by the 
Statutory Auditors.
III.	 Internal audit reports relating to internal control weaknesses.
IV.	 The appointment, removal and terms of remuneration of the Chief internal 
auditor shall be placed before the Audit Committee.
V.	
Certification/ declaration of financial statements by the Chief Executive/ 
Chief Finance Officer to be designated by the Board.
VI.	 Statement of deviations in terms of the SEBI Listing Regulations:
a.	 Quarterly statement of deviation(s) including report of monitoring agency, 
if applicable, submitted to stock exchange(s) where the Equity Shares 
are proposed to be listed in terms of the SEBI Listing Regulations;
b.	 Annual statement of funds utilized for purposes other than those stated 
in the offer document/prospectus/ notice in terms of the SEBI Listing 
Regulations
(30)	Carrying out any other function as is mentioned in the terms of reference of the 
Audit Committee;
(31)	Consider and comment on rationale, cost-benefits and impact of schemes involving 
merger, demerger, amalgamation etc., on the Company and its shareholders; and
(32)	Carrying out any other function as prescribed under the DPE Guidelines, 
Companies Act and Listing Regulations, as applicable to the Company from time 
to time and any other function as deemed appropriate or determined by the Board 
from time to time in the best interest of the Company and other stakeholders of 
the Company.
C. 	
Composition:
	
The Audit Committee consists of following members and is headed by a Official Part-time 
Director. 
Sl.No.
Name of Director
Status
1
Shri Mukesh Agrawal
Chairman
Official Part-time Director
2
Shri Marapally Venkateshwarlu
Member
Official Part-time Director
3
Shri Ajay Kumar
Member
Functional Director
4
Shri Rajeev Kumar Sinha
Member
Functional Director



	
175
HoD (IAD) and Statutory Auditors are invited to the Audit Committee Meeting. CFO is the 
Permanent Invitee and Company Secretary is the Secretary to the Committee. Senior functional 
executives are also invited as and when required to provide necessary clarification to the 
Committee. Internal Audit Department provide necessary support for holding and conducting 
the Audit Committee Meeting.
	
Meeting and Attendance:
During the Financial Year 2025-26, 13 (Thirteen) meetings were held on 30.04.2025, 
24.05.2025, 26.05.2025, 11.07.2025, 18.07.2025, 08.08.2025, 13.09.2025, 25.10.2025, 
20.01.2026, 23.02.2026, 10.03.2026, 12.03.2026 and 25.03.2026 respectively. The details of 
the Audit Committee meetings attended by members are as under:
Sl. No.
Directors
No. of Audit Committee 
Meetings held during their 
tenure
No. of Audit 
Committee Meetings 
attended
Functional Directors
1.
Shri Shankar Nagachari
08
08
2.
Shri Ajay Kumar
13
13
3.
Shri Rajeev Kumar Sinha
05
05
Part-time official Directors
4.
Shri Mukesh Agrawal
13
13
5.
Shri Marapally Venkateshwarlu
13
13
4.	
Nomination and Remuneration Committee
(A)	 Brief description of terms of reference
	
CMPDIL being a Central Public Sector Undertaking, appointment and tenure of Functional 
Directors are done by Govt. of India. Their remuneration is also fixed by Govt. of India. The 
Board constituted the Nomination & Remuneration Committee in its 191st Board Meeting held 
on 30.12.2015 and was reconstituted in 292nd Board meeting held on 24.05.2025 in order to 
follow the best practice of Corporate Governance.
	
The terms of reference, powers, and role of Nomination and Remuneration Committee as as 
under:
1.	 To decide and approve the annual bonus/variable pay pool/performance related pay 
and policy for its distribution across executives and non-unionized supervisors of the 
Company within the limits prescribed in the DPE Guidelines;
2.	 To review the policies for selection and removal of persons in Senior Management 
and other employees as per DPE Guidelines and other Government Guidelines and 
recommend the same for approval to the Board;
3.	 To identify persons who may be appointed in senior management in accordance 
with the criteria laid down, recommend to the Board their appointment and removal;
4.	 To recommend to the Board of Directors a policy relating to the remuneration, in 
whatever form, for the key managerial personnel, senior management and other 
employees;


176
5.	 Taking on record the appointment and removal of directors, including independent 
directors, by the President of India, acting through the Ministry of Coal, Government 
of India;
6.	 Taking on record the extension, if any, of the term of the independent directors of the 
Company, as may be directed by the President of India, acting through the acting 
through the Ministry of Coal, Government of India; and
7.	 Carrying out any other function as specified by the Board as may be prescribed 
under the Companies Act or DPE Guidelines, SEBI Listing Regulations and any 
other laws and their amendments from time to time and taking on record the various 
policies, if any, promulgated by the Central Government
(B)	
Composition, Name of members and chairperson and meeting details
	
The Nomination & Remuneration Committee of CMPDIL consists of following members 
and is headed by an Official Part-time Director:
Sl.No.
Name of Director
Status
1
Shri Mukesh Agrawal
Chairman
Official Part-time Director
2
Shri Marapally Venkateshwarlu
Member
Official Part-time Director
	
Company Secretary will act as Secretary to this Committee and GM (HR) would be the 
Nodal Officer of the Committee.
(C) 	
Meeting and Attendance:
	
No meeting was held during the financial year 2025-26.
5.	
Stakeholder’s Relationship Committee
A.	
Brief description of terms of reference
	
CMPDIL Board constituted the Stakeholders’ Relationship Committee in its 292nd Board 
Meeting held on 24.05.2025 and was reconstituted in 303rd Board meeting held on 
10.03.2026 in line with the provisions of Regulation 20 of SEBI Listing Regulations read 
with Section 178(5) of the Companies Act 2013.
 B.	
Scope of Stakeholder’s Relationship Committee:
	
The role of Stakeholders’ Relationship Committee includes as under:
i.	
The Stakeholders’ Relationship Committee shall consider and resolve the 
grievances of the security holders of the Company including complaints related 
to transfer of securities, non-receipt of annual report, non-receipt of declared 
dividends, etc.;
ii.	
Reviewing adherence to the service standards adopted by the Company in 
respect of various services being rendered by the registrar and share transfer 
agent;
iii.	
Review of measures taken for effective exercise of voting rights by shareholders.
iv.	
Reviewing the various measures and initiatives undertaken by the Company 
for reducing the quantum of unclaimed dividends and ensuring timely receipt of 
dividend warrants/annual reports/statutory notices by the shareholders of the 
Company; and



	
177
v.	
Carrying out any other function contained in the SEBI Listing Regulations, as and 
when amended from time to time.
C.	
Composition and name of non-executive director heading the Committee
	
The Stakeholder’s Relationship Committee of CMPDIL consists of following members 
and is headed by an Official Part-time Director: 
Sl.No.
Name of Director
Status
1
Shri Mukesh Agrawal
Chairman
Official Part-time Director
2
Shri Marapally Venkateshwarlu
Member
Official Part-time Director
3
Shri Ajay Kumar
Member
Functional Director
D. 
Name and designation of the Compliance Officer
	
Shri Abhishek Mundhra is the Company Secretary & Compliance Officer of CMPDIL. 
Company Secretary is primarily responsible to ensure compliance with the applicable 
statutory requirements and is the interface between Management and regulatory authorities 
on governance matters. 
E.	
Meeting and Attendance:
	
No meeting was held during the financial year 2025-26.
F.	
Status of complaints as on 2025-26(Quarter wise): -
Quarter
Opening
Received
Resolved
Pending
Quarter 4
0
3
0
3
	
	
Note: The complaints pending as on 31st March 2026 is resolved on 8th April 2026.
5A 	
Risk Management Committee
(A)	
 Brief description of terms of reference
	
Risk Management Committee was constituted by CMPDIL Board of Directors in its 192nd 
Board Meeting held on 02.02.2016 and reconstituted in 303rd Board Meeting held on 
10.03.2026. The role of the committee shall, inter alia, include the following:
1. 	 To formulate a detailed risk management policy which shall include:
(a) 	 A framework for identification of internal and external risks specifically faced by 
the Company, in particular including financial, operational, sectoral, sustainability 
(particularly, environmental social and governance related risks), information, 
cyber security risks or any other risk as may be determined by the Committee.
(b) 	 Measures for risk mitigation including systems and processes for internal control 
of identified risks.
(c) 	 Business continuity plan.
2. 	 To ensure that appropriate methodology, processes and systems are in place to 
monitor and evaluate risks associated with the business of the Company;
3. 	 To monitor and oversee implementation of the risk management policy, including 
evaluating the adequacy of risk management systems.
4. 	 To periodically review the risk management policy, at least once in two years, 
including by considering the changing industry dynamics and evolving complexity;
5. 	 To keep the board of directors informed about the nature and content of its 
discussions, recommendations and actions to be taken.


178
6. 	 The appointment, removal and terms of the Chief Risk Officer (if any) shall be 
subject to review by the Risk Management Committee
A.	
Composition:
	
The Risk Management committee consists of following members and is headed by  Official 
Part Time Director:
SL.No.
Name of Director
Status
1
Shri Marapally Venkateshwarlu
Chairman
Official Part Time Director
2
Shri Ajay Kumar
Member
Functional Director
3
Shri Nripendra Nath
Member
Functional Director
Company Secretary will act as Secretary to this Committee and General Manager (Excavation) 
would be the Nodal Officer of the Committee.
B. 	
Meeting and Attendance:
	
2 (Two) meeting were held during the Financial Year 2025-26 on 25.11.2025 and 
25.03.2026 respectively. The details of the Risk Management Committee meeting attended 
by members are as under:
Sl.
No.
Name of Director
Status
No. of 
Meetings 
held during 
their tenure
Number of 
meetings 
attended
1
Shri Marapally Venkateshwarlu
Chairman
2
2
2
Shri Ajay Kumar
Member
2
1
3
Shri Nripendra Nath
Member
1
1
4
Shri Shankar Nagachari                    
Member
1
1
5B 	
Particulars of Senior Management:
	
The details of Senior Management including the changes there in since the close of 
previous financial year is as under
Sr. 
No.
Designation
SMP AS on 
24.05.2025
SMP AS on 
31.03.2026
Remarks indicating 
changes, if any, in 
the post operated 
from 24.05.2025 to 
31.03.2026
1
GM (Mining) and RD-RI-1
Abhijit Banerjee
Abhijit 
Banerjee
2
GM (Mining) and RD-RI-2
Uma Shankar 
Singh
Uma Shankar 
Singh
3
GM (Excavation) and RD-
RI-3
Kanchan Sinha
Kanchan Sinha
4
GM (Mining) and RD-RI-4
Rajesh Ralhan
Rajesh Ralhan
5
GM (Mining) and RD-RI-5
Manoj Kumar
Manoj Kumar
6
GM (Mining) and RD-RI-6
Badal Manna
Badal Manna
7
GM (Excavation) and RD-
RI-7
Sanjay Kumar 
Bhar
Sanjay Kumar 
Bhar



	
179
Sr. 
No.
Designation
SMP AS on 
24.05.2025
SMP AS on 
31.03.2026
Remarks indicating 
changes, if any, in 
the post operated 
from 24.05.2025 to 
31.03.2026
8
GM (Excavation) and HoD 
–TS/PR
Sanjay Kumar 
Dubey
Dhiraj Kumar 
GM (Mining) 
and HoD –TS
Dhiraj Kumar  
Assumed charge 
of HoD –TS in place 
of Late Sri Sanjay 
Kumar Dubey.
9
GM (Mining) and HoD-BD
Rajesh Kumar 
Amar
Vikrant Gupta 
Sr. Mgr. (E&M) 
and HoD-BD
Vikrant Gupta  
Assumed charge of 
HoD (BD) on
superannuation of 
Shri R K Amar.
10
GM (Geology) and HoD –
Exploration/CC Lab
Rajiva Kumar 
Singh
Surendra 
Kumar Gupta 
GM (Geology) 
and HoD –
Expl./CC Lab
Ramesh 
Thiagarajan, GM 
(Geology) and HoD 
–Expl./CC Lab , 
Assumed charge of 
HoD –Expl./CC Lab 
on promotion of Shri 
Rajiva Kumar Singh, 
as ED (Exploration) 
CIL.
Surendra Kumar 
Gupta  Assumed 
charge of HoD 
–Expl./CC Lab 
w.e.f. 01.03.2026 
on superannuation 
of Shri Ramesh 
Thiagarajan
11
GM (Environment) and HoD 
–Environment.
Vinod Kumar 
Pandey
Vinod 
KumarPandey
12
GM (Personal) and HoD- 
P&A
Sanjay Kadambar Sanjay 
Kadambar
13
GM (Mining) and HoD-
HRD/CSR
Ram Krishna 
Mahapatro
Shishir 
Dutta GM 
(Excavation) 
and HoD-HRD/
CSR
Shishir Dutta  
Assumed charge of 
HoD-HRD/CSR on 
superannuation of 
Shri Ram Krishna 
Mahapatro.
14
GM (MM) and HoD- MM
Deepak Kumar
H R 
Sonapuram 
GM 
(Excavation) 
and HoD- MM
H R Sonapuram  
Assumed charge 
of HoD- MM on 
superannuation of 
Shri Deepak Kumar.
15
GM(E&M) and HoD-E&M
Sudarshan 
Prasad
Sudarshan 
Prasad


180
Sr. 
No.
Designation
SMP AS on 
24.05.2025
SMP AS on 
31.03.2026
Remarks indicating 
changes, if any, in 
the post operated 
from 24.05.2025 to 
31.03.2026
16
GM (Civil) and HoD-Civil
K. A. Pandian
Pradeep 
Kumar Sonker 
GM(Civil) and 
HoD-Civil
Pradeep Kumar 
Sonker  Assumed 
charge of GM (Civil) 
and
HoD-Civil on 
superannuation of 
Shri K.
A. Pandian. 
17
GM (Civil) and HoD- 
TE&CM
Bhabani Prasad 
Mishra
Barun Kumar 
Gupta 
GM(E&M) and 
HoD- TE&CM
Barun Kumar Gupta 
Assumed charge of 
HoD- TE&CM on
superannuation of 
Shri Bhabani Prasad
Mishra
18
GM (Mining) and HoD- 
Blasting
Dr. Kunal Das
Dr. Kunal Das
Dr. Kunal Das 
Superannuated on 
March 31,2026.
19
GM (Excavation) and HoD 
-OC
Randip Singh
Randip Singh
Randip Singh 
Superannuated on 
March 31,2026
20
GM (Mining) and HoD 
-UMD
Pramod Kumar
Pramod Kumar
21
GM (Excavation) and HoD- 
PAD
Rakesh Kumar 
Sharma
Rakesh Kumar 
Sharma
22
GM (Mining) and HoD- CED Bikesh Kumar 
Pandey
Bikesh Kumar 
Pandey
23
GM (System) and HoD- ICT Samrat Dasgupta Samrat 
Dasgupta
24
GM (Excavation) and HoD- 
S&T
Amar Kant 
Mishra
Milan Sen GM 
(Mining) and 
HoD-S&T
Milan Sen  Assumed 
charge of HoD(S&T) 
on superannuation 
of Shri Amar Kant 
Mishra.
25
GM (Civil) and HoD- 
Geomatics
Mohit Rastogi
Mohit Rastogi
26
GM (CP) and HoD- CMP
Abha Prasad
Abha Prasad
27
GM (E&T) and HoD- E&T
Jitendra Tiwari
Priyesh Kumar 
Dixit SM (E&T) 
and HoD-ME
Priyesh Kumar Dixit  
Assumed charge 
of HoD-ME on 
superannuation of 
Shri Jitendra Tiwari.



	
181
Sr. 
No.
Designation
SMP AS on 
24.05.2025
SMP AS on 
31.03.2026
Remarks indicating 
changes, if any, in 
the post operated 
from 24.05.2025 to 
31.03.2026
28
GM (E&M) and TS to D(T/
ES)
Gopal Chandra 
Biswas
Vinod Kumar 
Singh 
CM(Mining) 
and TS to D(T/
ES)
Vinod Kumar Singh  
Assumed charge of 
TS to D(T/ES) on 
superannuation of 
Shri Gopal Chandra 
Biswas.
29
GM (Excavation) and HoD- 
EP&CA
Nimesh , GM 
(E&M) and HoD-
CMC
Malay Kumar 
Majee, GM 
(Excavation) and 
HoD- EP&CA
Malay Kumar 
Majee
Malay Kumar Majee   
Assumed charge 
of HoD(CMC) on 
superannuation 
of Shri Nimesh, in 
addition of existing 
charge of HoD- 
EP&CA.
30
CM (Security) and HoD- 
Security
Major 
Raghvendra 
Singh
Major 
Raghvendra 
Singh
31
Chief Manager (F) and 
HoD-IAD
Shashank 
Bhushan Tiwari
Shashank 
Bhushan 
Tiwari
32
SM (Geology)/TS to DT 
(CRD)
Vivek Kumar 
Tripathi
Vivek Kumar 
Tripathi
33
SM (Excavation)/TS to 
D(T/P&D)
Kumar Amit 
Singh
Kumar Amit 
Singh
34
SM (Geology)/HoD-(CMPDI 
Delhi Office)
R. K. Das
R. K. Das
35
AM (Sectt)/PS to CMD
Gautam Kumar 
Majhi
Gautam Kumar 
Majhi
36
GM(Mining) and TS to DT 
(RD&T)
Somesh 
Kumar
Assumed charge of 
TS to DT (RD&T)
6.	
Remuneration of Directors from April, 2025 to March, 2026:   
	
All the Directors of the company are appointed by the President of India. The terms and 
conditions and the remuneration of all full time Functional Directors are decided by the 
President of India in terms of Articles of Association of the company / Coal India Limited. 
(A) 	
Functional Directors
	
The details of the Remuneration of the Functional Directors of the Company for the 
Financial Year April, 2025 to March, 2026 are as under:


182
(Figure in Rs.)
Name
Designation
Gross 
Salary 
(Basic 
and 
dearness Allowances)
Perks (35% of Basic + Other 
Perks)
HRA
CMPF Employer’s Contribution 
(PF + PENSION + Gratuity + CIL 
EDCPS+CPRMSE)
Leave Encashment
PRP Advance / PRP 
Gratuity
Medical expenses
TOTAL
SHRI CHAUDHARI 
SHIV RAJ SINGH 
CMD
1057703.23
241327.30
0
317310.969
705363.6
0
0
40614.2
2362319.29
SHRI MANOJ 
KUMAR
Ex-CMD
2598486.01
609233.15
0
779545.803
2511110.81
2843119
2500000
98310.27
11939805.04
SHRI AJAY KUMAR 
Director (T)
4407261.73
1023240.40
0
1322178.519
376038.9
2755572
0
82036.71
9966328.25
SHRI RAJEEV 
KUMAR SINHA 
Director (T)
1761933.84
403690.00
0
528580.152
707726.4
0
0
14125
3416055.39
SHRI NRIPENDRA 
NATH
Director(T)
1814712.42
415782.50
0
544413.726
0
0
0
2613
2777521.64
SHRI  S. 
NAGACHARI
Ex-Director(T)
4038140.87
940918.51
0
1211442.261
401108.16
2767376
0
129636.67
9488622.47
TOTAL
15678238.10
3634191.86
0
4703471.43
4701347.87
8366067
2500000
367335.85
39950652.11
(B)  
Part-Time Official Directors
	
No remuneration is being paid to the Part-Time Official Directors by CMPDIL:-
1.	
Shri Mukesh Agrawal Director (Finance) is the Govt. Nominee Director from Coal 
India Limited, Kolkata and his remuneration is being paid by the Coal India Limited.
2.	
Shri Marapally Venkateshwarlu, is the Govt. Nominee Director from the Ministry of 
Coal, New Delhi. His remuneration is being paid by the Ministry of Coal, Govt. of 
India.
7.	
General Body Meetings
The details of Annual General Meetings held during the last three years are as under:
AGM
Year
Day, Date & Time
Venue
Whether 
special
Resolution 
Passed or 
not.
48th AGM 2022-23
Friday, 21 July, 2023 at 10:45 A.M. At 
the 
Registered 
office of the company, 
Gondwana 
Place, 
Kanke Road, Ranchi, 
Jharkhand - 834008
NO
49th AGM 2023-24
Friday, 05 July, 2024 at 3:00 P.M
NO
50th AGM 2024-25
Tuesday,12th August, 2025 at 
10.00 AM
NO
	
The Company has not conducted any business through Postal Ballot during the Financial 
Year 2025-26.
8.	
Means of Communication
	
a)	
Quarterly Results and Newspaper publication:
	
The Company listed on Stock Exchanges (i.e, on NSE & BSE Ltd.) on March 30, 2026. 
The Company communicates with its shareholders through its Annual Report, General



	
183
Meetings and disclosures through website. The Company also communicates with its 
institutional shareholders through Individual discussions. Quarterly Financial Results were 
also disclosed to the Stock Exchanges and were published in the newspapers as per 
the details given below. Information and latest updates and announcement regarding the 
company can be accessed at company’s website under tab “Investor Relation”
Quarter
English Newspaper
Vernacular Newspaper
March'26
The Economic Times
Prabhat Khabar
	
b) 	
Presentation made to the Institutional Investors and Analysts:
	
The salient features of financial results are uploaded on company website for the 
information of Institutional Investors, Analysts and general public after it is intimated to 
Stock Exchanges.
9.	
General Shareholder Information
(a)	
Annual General Meeting
	
Date: 17th August, 2026
	
Day:  Monday
	
Time: 04:00 P.M.
	
Venue: 3rd Floor, Board Room, CMPDIL HQ, Kanke Road, Ranchi – 834008.
(b)	
Financial Year:
	
April 1 to March 31 every year.
(c)	
Record Date. 
	
The Company has fixed the 10th August, 2026 as the Record date to determine the 
Shareholders who are eligible to receive Final Dividend.
(d)	
Payment of Dividend.
	
Shareholders of CMPDIL in its Annual General Meeting held on 12th August’25 had 
approved payment of final dividend of Rs 150 Crores on equity shares for the Financial 
Year 2024-25 and the same was paid on 13th August 2025. 
	
CMPDIL Board in its meeting held on 18th July’ 25 had approved 1st Interim Dividend @ Rs 
1.05 per equity share amounting to Rs 74.97 Crores and the same was paid on 28th July 
2025. CMPDIL Board in its meeting held on 25th October, 2025 had approved payment 
of 2nd Interim Dividend @ 1.05 per equity share amounting to Rs 74.97 Crores and the 
same was paid on 29th October 2025. CMPDIL Board in its meeting held on 20th January 
2026 had approved payment of 3rd Interim Dividend @ 1.05 per equity share amounting to 
Rs. 74.97 Crores and the same was paid on 22nd January 2026.   In the 308th Board 
Meeting held on 21st April 2026, Board had recommended payment of final dividend @ Rs 
1.06 per equity share for F.Y 2025-26 amounting to Rs 75.68 Crores and the same would 
be paid if approved by shareholders in the ensuing AGM.
(e)	
Listing on Stock Exchanges
	
The Equity Shares of the Company are listed on two Stock Exchanges in India viz. 
a) 	 BSE Limited, Phiroze Jeejeebhoy Towers, Dalal Street, Mumbai - 400 001.


184
b) 	 National Stock Exchange of India Ltd., Exchange Plaza, 5th floor, Plot No. C/1, G 
Block, Bandra- Kurla Complex, Bandra (E), Mumbai - 400051.
	
The Company has paid Listing fees for the Financial Year 2025-26 to the above Stock 
Exchanges. The Company has also made the payment of Annual listing fee to National 
Securities Depository Limited (NSDL) and Central Depository Services (India) Limited 
(CDSL) for the Financial Year 2025-26.
(f)	
CMPDIL securities were never suspended from trading during 2025-26 in both 
the Stock Exchanges.
(g)	
Registrar to Issue and Share Transfer Agent
	
	
M/s K FIN Technologies Limited,
	
Selenium Tower- B, Plot No. 31 & 32, Financial District, Nanakramguda, Serilingampally, 
Hyderabad, Telangana, India – 500032
(h)	
Share Transfer System
	
Pursuant to SEBI Listing Regulations, as amended, securities can be transferred only in 
dematerialized form w.e.f 1st April’ 2019. Shareholders holding equity shares in physical 
form are requested to consider converting their holding to dematerialized form. Transfers 
of equity shares in electronic form are effected through the depositories without any 
involvement of the Company.
(i)	
Distribution of Shareholding
	
Shares held by different categories of shareholders and size of holdings as on 31st March’ 
2026 is given below: 
i) 	
Shareholding pattern as on 31st March, 2026:
CMPDIL Consolidated Share Holding Pattern as on 31/03/2026
Category
No of Holders (with 
Grouping)
Total Shares
% of Equity
PROMOTERS
1
606900000
85.000
OTHER MUTUAL FUND
5
44583226
6.2441
INSURANCE COMPANIES
3
18804608
2.6337
FOREIGN PORTFOLIO - CORP.
10
8663391
1.2134
RESIDENT INDIVIDUALS
88400
17259760
2.4173
BODIES CORPORATES    
14
50240
0.0071
ALTERNATIVE INVESTMENT FUND
1
2016200
0.2824
HUF
2137
937280
0.1313
NRI REP
196
76960
0.0108
NRI NON REP
191
61040
0.0085
SOVEREIGN WEALTH FUNDS
2
581460
0.0814
NATIONALISED BANKS
3
14065835
1.9700
Total
90963
714000000
100.000



	
185
ii)	
Top Ten shareholders as on 31st March, 2026:
Top 10 Share Holders as on 31/03/2026
Name
Total Share
% of Equity
Category
COAL INDIA LIMITED
606900000
85.000 PROMOTERS
ICICI PRUDENTIAL EQUITY & DEBT FUND
7765430
1.088 MUTUAL FUNDS
ICICI PRUDENTIAL DIVIDEND YIELD EQUITY 
FUND
6888354
0.965 MUTUAL FUNDS
NIPPON LIFE INDIA TRUSTEE LTD-A/C 
NIPPON INDIA SMALL CAP FUND
20763500
2.908 MUTUAL FUNDS
BANK OF BARODA
2813167
0.394 NATIONALISED BANKS
PUNJAB NATIONAL BANK
5626334
0.788 NATIONALISED BANKS
LIFE INSURANCE CORPORATION OF INDIA
17076048
2.392 INSURANCE COMPANIES
BNP PARIBAS FINANCIAL MARKETS - ODI
2871755
0.402 FOREIGN PORTFOLIO - 
CORP
BARING PRIVATE EQUITY INDIA FUND 6
2016200
0.282 ALTERNATIVE 
INVESTMENT FUND
STATE BANK OF INDIA
5626334
0.788 NATIONALISED BANKS
iii) 	
Distribution of shareholding according to size, % of holding as on 31st March, 
2026:
CMPDIL Consolidated Share Holding Pattern as on 31/03/2026
Category (Shares)
No of Cases
% of Cases
Total Shares
Amount
% of Amount
1-5000
90611
99.347631
1,53,36,040
3,06,72,080
2.147905
5001- 10000
192
0.210512
5,98,400
11,96,800
0.083810
10001- 20000
351
0.384843
21,54,000
43,08,000
0.301681
20001- 30000
9
0.009868
1,06,160
2,12,320
0.014868
30001- 40000
1
0.001096
20,000
40,000
0.002801
40001- 50000
2
0.002193
48,000
96,000
0.006723
50001- 100000
3
0.003289
1,01,354
2,02,708
0.014195
100001& Above
37
0.040568
69,56,36,046
1,39,12,72,092
97.428018
Total
91206
100.00
71,40,00,000
1,42,80,00,000
100.00
iv) 	
Major Shareholders: -
	
Details of shareholders holding more than 10% of paid up capital of the Company as on 
31st March, 2026 are given below:
Name of Shareholder
No of Shares
% to Paid – up Capital
Category
Coal India Limited
606900000
85
promoter
(j)	
Dematerialization of Shares and Liquidity
	
Shares of the Company issued to the Public are in dematerialized segment and are 
available for trading at NSE and BSE.  Shares held by Coal India Limited (CIL) are also in 
demat form. No of shares held in dematerialized and physical mode as on 31st Mar’26:
Mode of holding
Total Shares
% Equity
Held in dematerialized form in CDSL
1,31,44,160
1.840919
Held in dematerialized form in NSDL
70,08,55,680
98.159059
Physical/Pool Transit*
160
0.000022
Total
71,40,00,000
100.00
	
*160 shares in transite for credit into resident individual demat account.


186
(k)	
Reconciliation of Share Capital Audit
	
As required by Securities & Exchange Board of India (SEBI), quarterly audit of Reconciliation 
of share capital is being carried out by a peer reviewed practicing Company Secretary 
with a view to reconcile the total share capital with National Securities Depository Limited 
(NSDL) and Central Depository Services (India) Limited (CDSL) and in physical form, 
with the issued and listed capital. The Secretarial Audit Report for reconciliation of share 
capital is submitted to BSE Limited and National Stock Exchange of India Limited within 
the stipulated time for fourth quarter March 2026.
(l)	
Company has not issued any ADR or GDR or warrant or any convertible 
instruments.
(m)	
Disclosure of Commodity price risk or foreign exchange risk and hedging 
activities 
	
CMPDIL is primarily engaged in providing consultancy, engineering and technical services 
to the coal and mining sector. The Company does not have any significant exposure to 
commodity price risk. Further, the Company's operations are predominantly domestic in 
nature and it does not have any material foreign currency exposure requiring hedging.
	
Accordingly, the Company has not undertaken any commodity hedging or foreign exchange 
hedging activities during the financial year under review.
(n)	
Details of Plant Location of Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Ltd. 
	
At present, Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Ltd. operates through its headquarters 
at Ranchi, Jharkhand and seven Regional Institutes designated as RI-I to RI-VII located at 
Asansol, Dhanbad, Ranchi, Nagpur, Bilaspur, Singrauli and Bhubaneswar.
	
The details are as under-
	
Name of Regional Institute	 	
	
	
	
Location
	
Regional Institute-I	
	
	
	
	
	
Asansol, West Bengal
	
Regional Institute-II	
	
	
	
	
	
Dhanbad, Jharkhand
	
Regional Institute-III	
	
	
	
	
	
Ranchi, Jharkhand
	
Regional Institute-IV	
	
	
	
	
	
Nagpur, Jharkhand
	
Regional Institute-V	
	
	
	
	
	
Bilaspur, Chhattisgarh
	
Regional Institute-VI	
	
	
	
	
	
Singrauli, Madhya Pradesh
	
Regional Institute-VII	 	
	
	
	
	
Bhubaneswar, Odisha
(o)	
Address for Correspondence
	
Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Ltd.
	
Gondwana Place, Kanke Road, Ranchi, Jharkhand-834008
(p)	
CMPDIL does not have credit ratings. 
10. 	
Other Disclosures
(a) 
Disclosures on materially significant related party transactions that may have 
potential conflict with the interests of listed entity at large
	
During the year, there was no transaction of material nature with Related Parties that had 
potential conflict with the interests of the Company. As required under Regulation 23(1) of



	
187
SEBI (LODR) Regulations, 2015, the Company has formulated a policy on dealing with 
Related Party.
(b)	
Details of Non- Compliances and Fines levied by BSE & NSE in last 3 years
	
The Company had complied with requirements of Regulatory Authorities on capital 
markets and no penalties/strictures were imposed against it in the last three years by 
Stock Exchange or SEBI or any other Statutory Authority. However, fine has been levied 
by BSE & NSE for the FY 2025-26. This fine had been levied for non-compliance of some 
of the provisions of LODR with regards to appointment of required number of Independent 
Directors including a woman Independent Director, Composition of various statutory sub- 
committees of the Board. As on 31st March’ 2026 total penalty levied by both the Stock 
Exchanges was Rs 51,920/- (for QE March’ 2026). Company has also informed both 
exchanges that being a Central Public Sector Enterprise, appointment of Director including 
Independent Directors and Woman Director are made exclusively by the President of India 
acting through the Ministry of Coal, by means of Presidential Orders and Company took 
up the matter with Ministry of Coal, its administrative Ministry with a request to appoint 
Independent Director including woman Director and requested the Stock Exchanges to 
waive the fine levied on the company. 
(c)	
Details of establishment of vigil mechanism 
	
In order to strengthen the ethical behaviours of the employees of the company and promote 
the interest of different stake holders, the whistle blower policy of CMPDIL was introduced 
during the year 2011-12 and Board was informed in its 163rd meeting held on 08th August, 
2011. This policy is formulated to provide an opportunity to employees to report to the 
management instances of unethical behaviour, actual or suspected, fraud or violation of 
the company’s code of conduct. Pursuant to Section 177(9) & (10) of Companies Act, 
2013 and Regulation 22 of SEBI LODR Regulations 2015, the company had formulated 
“Whistle Blower Policy”. It is to provide necessary safeguards for protection of employees 
from reprisals or victimization.
	
CMPDIL had provided ample opportunities to encourage directors and employees to 
become whistle blowers (Directors and employees who voluntarily and confidentially 
want to bring the unethical practices, actual or suspected fraudulent transactions in the 
organization to the notice of competent authority for the greater interest of the organization 
and the nation). It has also ensured a very robust mechanism within the framework to 
protect them (whistle blowers) from any kind of harm. It is hereby affirmed that no personnel 
have been denied access to the Audit committee.
(d)	
Details of compliance with mandatory requirements and adoption of the non-
mandatory requirements
	
Company has complied with all the mandatory requirements of Corporate Governance. 
The details of Non-Mandatory requirements are mentioned in Annexure-A
(e) 	
Web link where policy for determining ‘material’ subsidiaries is disclosed 
	
The Company has no subsidiary and therefore the requirement for formulation of a Policy 
for determining ‘Material Subsidiaries’ is not applicable.
(f) 	
Web link where policy on dealing with related party transactions 
	
Details of Policy on dealing with Related Party Transactions were disclosed in company


188
website under tab “Investor Relation” and can be accessed at the following link: https://
www.cmpdi.co.in/sites/default/files/2025-05/Policy%20on%20Materiality%20of%20
Related%20Party%20Transactions%20And%20On%20Dealing%20with%20the%20
Related%20Party%20Transactions.pdf
(g)  
Details of utilization of funds raised through preferential allotment or qualified 
institutions placement as specified under Regulation 32 (7A). 
	
Company has not raised any fund through preferential allotment or qualified institutions.
(h)  
A certificate from a company secretary in practice that none of the directors 
on the board of the company have been debarred or disqualified from being 
appointed or continuing as directors of companies by the Board / Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs or any such statutory authority 
	
Company has obtained a certificate from M/s Mahata Agarwal & Associates and the same 
is enclosed in Addendum-V.
(I) 	
Where the board had not accepted any recommendation of any committee of the 
board which is mandatorily required, in the relevant financial year, the same to 
be disclosed along with reasons thereof 
	
CMPDIL Board has accepted all the recommendation of all the Sub-Committees of the 
Board for the financial year 2025-26.
(J) 	
Total fees for all services paid by the listed entity and its subsidiaries, on a 
consolidated basis, to the statutory auditor and all entities in the network firm/
network entity of which the statutory auditor is a part.
	
Details of total fees paid to Statutory Auditors are given in Note 13.8 of Financial Accounts 
of the Company and are also as under: -
(Amount in Lakhs)
Type of service
FY 2025-26
FY2024-25
Audit fees
6.00
6.00
Tax fees
0.00
1.00
Others
5.00
4.00
Total
11.00
11.00
(k) 	
Disclosures in relation to the Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace 
(Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013
No of Complaint filed 
during the financial year
No. of Complaint 
disposed of during the 
financial year
No of Complaint Pending 
as on end of the financial 
year.
1 (One)
NIL
1 (One)
(l) 	
Disclosure by listed entity and its subsidiaries of ‘Loans and advances in the 
nature of loans to firms/companies in which directors are interested by name 
and amount 
	
Company has not provided any loans and advances to any firms/companies in which 
directors are interested.



	
189
(m) 	
Details of material subsidiaries of the listed entity; including the date and place 
of incorporation and the name and date of appointment of the statutory auditors 
of such subsidiaries.
	
The Company does not have any subsidiary as on 31st March 2026. Accordingly, the 
disclosure requirements relating to material subsidiaries are not applicable.
11. 	
Non-compliance of any requirement of corporate governance report 
	
All the requirements of Corporate Governances have been duly complied with.
12. 	
Declaration required under Regulation 26 (3) of SEBI (Listing Obligations and 
Disclosure Requirements) Regulations, 2015 
	
All the members of the Board and Senior Management Personnel have affirmed compliance 
to the Code of Conduct of Board of Directors and Senior Management for the Financial 
Year ended on 31st March, 2026.
	
	
Sd/- 
	
	
(Chaudhari Shivraj Singh) 
	
	
Chairman-cum-Managing Director
	
	
DIN: 11416124
 
Place : Ranchi 
Date : 10.07.2026


190
Annexure – A
Discretionary Requirements
Besides the mandatory requirements as mentioned in preceding pages, the status of compliance with 
non-mandatory requirements of Reg. 27(1) of SEBI (LODR) Regulations, 2015 read with Part E of 
Schedule-II are produced below:
1. 	
Board Composition:
	
The Company is headed by an Executive Chairman on its Board.
2. 	
Shareholder Rights:
	
The Company publishes its quarterly financial results in leading newspapers and on its official 
website (www.cmpdi.co.in).
3.  
Modified Opinions in Audit Report:
	
The Company consistently strives to present unqualified financial statements. The report of 
Auditors forms part of Annual Report.
4. 	
Separation of Roles – Chairperson and Managing Director:
	
As per SEBI guidelines, the separation of the roles of Chairman and Managing Director is 
voluntary. The Company continues to comply with this guidance accordingly.
5. 	
Reporting of Internal Auditor:
	
The HoD (Internal Audit) reports directly to the Chief Executive Officer (CEO). Internal and 
External Auditors appointed by the Company submit their reports to the respective General 
Managers/ RDs at the locations where audits are conducted. These reports are reviewed by 
the Audit Committee. The Internal Auditors may also report directly to the Audit Committee, 
where necessary.
6. 	
Meetings of Independent Directors:
	
The Independent Directors are yet to be appointed by the Ministry of Coal, Govt. of India after 
the cessation of office of the Independent Directors appointed earlier. The meeting will be 
conducted only on appointment of Independent Directors.
7. 	
Risk Management:
	
The Company has constituted a Risk Management Committee in compliance with Regulation 
21, with defined composition, roles, and responsibilities.



	
191
ADDENDUM - IV
Statutory Auditor’s Report and replies of Management


192



	
193


194



	
195


196



	
197


198



	
199


200



	
201


202



	
203


204



	
205


206



	
207


208



	
209


210



	
211


212



	
213


214



	
215


216



	
217


218



	
219


220



	
221


222



	
223


224



	
225


226



	
227
ADDENDUM - V
Secretarial Auditor’s Report, Compliance of conditions of Corporate Governance Certificate and 
Management Response.


228



	
229


230



	
231


232



	
233


234



	
235
Management Responses to the Observations Raised by Secretarial Auditor during Secretarial 
Audit of Financial Year 2025-26.  
 
Sl.
No. 
Auditor Observations
Management Responses
1. 
Board Composition:
 
The Board of Directors of the Company is duly 
constituted with Executive Directors, Nominee 
Directors and Functional Directors. The changes in 
the Composition of the Board of Directors that took 
place during the period under review were duly 
recorded and proper procedure had been followed 
by the company. 
However, during the period under review, the 
Company did not have the requisite number of 
Independent Directors as required under Section 
149(4) of the Companies Act, 2013, Regulation 17 
of SEBI (LODR) Regulations and Clause 3.1.2 of the 
DPE Guidelines for CPSEs. 
Consequently, during the period under review, no 
separate meeting of Independent Directors was held as 
per the provision of Section 149(8) of the Companies Act, 
2013 read with Schedule IV due to non-appointment of 
Independent Director. 
The Company, being a Central 
Public Sector Enterprise (CPSE) 
under the administrative control of 
the Ministry of Coal, Government 
of 
India, 
has 
its 
Directors 
appointed by the Government of 
India through Presidential Orders. 
 
The non-compliance has arisen on 
account of the non-appointment of 
the 
requisite 
Independent 
Directors, including a Woman 
Independent 
Director, 
by 
the 
Government 
of 
India. 
The 
appointment 
of 
Independent 
Directors to the Board of CPSEs is 
undertaken by the Government of 
India and is beyond the control 
and authority of the Company. 
 
Nevertheless, the Company has 
been consistently following up with 
the concerned authorities of the 
Government 
of 
India 
and 
continues to pursue the matter for 
expeditious appointment of the 
requisite Independent Directors 
and 
resolution 
of 
the 
non-
compliance. 
 
2. 
Woman Director: 
 
The company, being a top 1000 listed entity, did not had 
an Independent Woman Director on its Board during the 
financial year 2025-26 as required under Regulation 17 
of the SEBI (Listing Obligations and Disclosure 
Requirements) Regulations, 2015. 
3. 
Induction / Familiarization Programme for 
Independent Directors: 
 
The Company did not conduct any induction /
familiarization programme for Independent Directors 
during the financial year 2025 26 as contemplated under 
the DPE Guidelines and Schedule IV of the Companies 
Act, 2013 and Regulation 25(7) of SEBI (LODR) 
Regulations 2015.


236
4. 
Audit Committee Composition:
 
The Audit Committee did not have the requisite number 
of Independent Directors during the financial year 2025
26 as required under Clause 4.1.1, Clause 4.1.2 and 
Clause 4.4 of the DPE Guidelines on Corporate 
Governance for CPSEs and Regulation 18 of SEBI 
(LODR) Regulations 2015. 
5. 
Nomination and Remuneration Committee: 
 
The Remuneration Committee of the Company was 
not properly constituted during the financial year 
2025 26 as required under Para 5.1 of Chapter 5 of 
the DPE Guidelines on Corporate Governance for 
CPSEs and Regulation 19 of SEBI (LODR) 
Regulations, 2015. 
 
Pursuant to Regulation 19 of SEBI (LODR) 
Regulations, 2015, the Remuneration Committee is 
required to discharge its functions through periodic 
meetings. 
However, 
no 
meeting 
of 
the 
Remuneration Committee was held during the year 
under review. 
 
6. 
Stakeholder Relationship Committee:
 
The Stakeholder Relationship Committee of the 
Company was not properly constituted during the 
financial 
year 
2025-26 
as 
required 
under 
Regulation 20 of SEBI (LODR) Regulations, 2015. 
Pursuant to Regulation 20 of SEBI (LODR) 
Regulations, 2015, the Stakeholders Relationship 
Committee is required to discharge its functions 
through periodic meetings. However, no meeting of 
the Stakeholders Relationship Committee was held 
during the year under review. 
7. 
Risk Management Committee: 
 
The Risk Management Committee of the Company 
was not properly constituted during the financial 
year 2025-26 as required under Regulation 21 of 
SEBI (LODR) Regulations, 2015. 
8. 
Corporate 
Social 
Responsibility 
(CSR) 
Committee: 
 
The 
Corporate 
Social 
Responsibility 
(CSR) 
Committee of the Company was not properly 
constituted during the financial year 2025-26 as 
required under Section 135 of Companies Act, 
2013.



	
237
9. 
Fire License / Fire Safety Clearance: 
 
During the course of verification, it was observed 
that the Fire License/ Fire Safety Clearance issued 
by the competent authority in respect of the 
registered office was not present. 
Letter has been issued to the 
Concerned department for taking
note and for the compliance of the 
same. 
10. 
Laboratory verification:
 
The Company produced the Consent to Operate 
(CTO) issued by the Jharkhand State Pollution 
Control Board during the course of audit. It was 
observed that the renewal application for the 
Consent to Operate has been filed with the 
competent authority and is presently under process. 
Letter has been issued to the 
Concerned department for taking 
note and for the compliance of the 
same. Further, application for 
renewal of "Consent to Operate" is 
under process.


238



	
239
ADDENDUM - VI
Contracts or Arrangements with related parties U/s 188 (1).
                                                              Form  No. AOC-2 
 
(Pursuant to clause (h) of sub-section (3) of section 134 of the Act and Rule 8(2) of the 
Companies (Accounts) Rules, 2014) 
Form for disclosure of particulars of contracts/arrangements entered into by the company 
with related parties referred to in sub-section (1) of section 188 of the Companies Act, 2013 
including certain arm’s length transactions under third proviso thereto. 
S.No 
Particulars 
Details 
1. 
Details of contracts or arrangement or transactions not at arm’s 
length basis 
NIL 
a 
Name(s) of the related party and nature of relationship 
 
b 
Nature of contracts/arrangements/transactions 
 
c 
Duration of the contracts/arrangements/transactions 
 
d 
Salient terms of the contracts or arrangements or transactions including 
the value, if any 
 
e 
Justification for entering into such contracts or arrangements or transactions  
f 
Date(s) of approval by the Board 
 
g 
Amount paid as advances, if any: 
 
h 
Date on which the special resolution was passed in general meeting as 
required under first proviso to section 188 
 
2. 
Details of material contracts or arrangement or transactions at arm’s 
length basis 
As per 
Annexure -A 
a 
Name (s) of the related party and nature of relationship 
 
b 
Nature of contracts/arrangements/transactions 
 
c 
Duration of the contracts/arrangements/transactions 
 
d 
Salient terms of the contracts or arrangements or transactions including 
the value, if any: 
 
e 
Date(s) of approval by the Board if any: 
 
f 
Amount paid as advances, if any


240
Annexure -A 
Related Party Transactions within Group as on 31.03.2026. 
 The Company being a Government related entity is exempt from the general disclosure 
requirements in relation to related party transactions and outstanding balances with the controlling 
Governments and another entity under same Government. 
 As per Ind AS 24, following are the disclosures regarding nature and amount of significant 
transactions under same management. 
(Rs. in Crore) 
Name of the Company 
Amount of 
transactions during 
the year 
Nature of 
Transactions 
Eastern Coalfields Limited 
 151.3
sales 
Bharat Coking Coal Limited 
 71.99
sales 
Central Coalfields Limited 
 162.22
sales
Western Coalfields Limited 
 326.20
sales
South Eastern Coalfields Limited 
 461.81
sales
Northern Coalfields Limited  
 166.47
sales 
Mahanadi Coalfields Limited  
 185.40
sales 
Coal India Limited (CIL) (100% Holding Company) 
402.37 
Sales and dividend  
Coal India Limited (CIL) R&D
11.65
sales
Grand Total 
1939.41



	
241
ADDENDUM - VII
Comments of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India


242



	
243
ADDENDUM- VIII
Report on Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) for Financial year 2025-26
1.	
Brief outline on CSR Policy of the Company:
CMPDIL is undertaking different developmental projects under Corporate Social Responsibility 
(CSR) following the latest DPE guidelines and provisions of the Companies Act, 2013. The 
minimum mandated expenditure in a particular financial year is allocated based on the 2% 
of the average net profit of the company in the three immediately preceding financial years 
in accordance with the Company’s Act, 2013 and its Amendments thereof. The CSR policy of 
CMPDIL is uploaded on its website www.cmpdi.co.in.
2.	
Composition of CSR Committee (FY 2025-26) 
Sl. 
No.
Name of Director
Designation/Nature of 
Directorship
Number of 
meetings of CSR 
Committee held 
during the FY 
2025-26
Number of meetings 
of CSR Committee 
attended during this 
year
1.
Shri Marapally 
Venkateshwarlu
(DIN-10059799)
Chairman
5
5
2. 
Shri Ajay Kumar
(DIN-09774347)
Member (upto 24.11.2025)
4
4
3.
Shri Shankar 
Nagachari
(Din-09729657)
Member (Upto 28.02.2026)
4
4
4.
Rajeev Kumar 
Sinha
Member ( from 10.03.2026)
1
1
5.
Nripendra Nath
Member (from 25.11.2025)
1
1
3.	
Provide the web-link(s) where Composition of CSR Committee, CSR Policy and CSR Proj-
ects approved by the board are disclosed on the website of the company.
Composition of CSR committee
https://www.cmpdi.co.in/en/investor/composition-of-committees
CSR Policy
https://www.cmpdi.co.in/en/c-s-r
CSR projects approved by the Board
https://www.cmpdi.co.in/en/c-s-r
4.	
Provide the executive summary along with web-link(s) of Impact Assessment of CSR Proj-
ects carried out in pursuance of sub-rule (3) of rule 8, if applicable.
Not Applicable on CMPDIL in pursuance of sub-rule (3) of rule 8 as per Section 135 of the 
Companies Act.


244
5.
(Rs. In crore)
S. 
No.
Head
Amount (₹ in Crore)
a.
Average net profit of the company as per sub-section (5) of section 135.
660.693
b.
Two percent of average net profit of the company as per sub-section 
(5) of section 135.
13.214
c.
Surplus arising out of the CSR Projects or programmes or activities of 
the previous financial years.
0.003
d.
Amount required to be set-off for the financial year approved in 307th 
Board meeting dated 25.03.2026 (attached as Annexure A)
2.3074
e.
Total CSR obligation for the financial year [(b)+(c)-(d)].
10.9096
6. 
(Rs. In crore)
a.
Amount spent on CSR Projects (both Ongoing Project and other than Ongoing Project).
 12.60
b.
Amount spent in Administrative Overheads
0.63
c.
Amount spent on Impact Assessment, if applicable.
NIL
d.
Total amount spent for the Financial Year [(a)+(b)+(c)].
13.23
(e) 	
CSR amount spent or unspent for the Financial Year:
Total 
Amount 
Spent 
for 
the 
Financial Year (in ₹ 
crore)
Amount Unspent (in Rs.)
Total Amount transferred to 
Unspent CSR Account as 
per subsection (6) of section 
135.
Amount transferred to any fund specified under 
Schedule VII as per second proviso to sub-section 
(5) of section 135.
Amount
Date of transfer Name of fund
Amount
Date of transfer
NIL
NA
NA
NIL
NA
(f)  
Excess amount for set-off, if any:
(Rs. In crore)
S. No.
Particulars
Amount
(1)
(2)
(3)
(i)
Two percent of average net profit of the company as per sub-section 
(5) of section 135
13.2140
(ii)
*Total amount spent for the Financial Year.
15.5404
(iii)
Excess amount spent for the Financial Year [(ii)-(i)]
2.3264
(iv)
Surplus arising out of the CSR projects or programmes or activities of 
the previous Financial Years, if any
0.0031
(v)
Amount available for set off in succeeding Financial Years [(iii)-(iv)]
2.3233
Note:* Includes excess amount of Rs. 2.31 crore from previous years.



	
245
7. 	
Details of Unspent CSR amount for the preceding three financial years
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
S. 
No.
Preceding 
Financial 
Year(s)
Amount 
transferred 
to Unspent 
CSR 
Account 
under 
subsection 
(6) of 
section 135 
(in Rs.)
Balance 
Amount in 
Unspent 
CSR 
Account 
under 
subsection 
(6) of 
section 
135 (in 
Rs.)
Amount 
spent 
in the 
Financial 
Year (in 
₹)
Amount 
transferred to a 
Fund as specified 
under Schedule 
VII as per second 
proviso to 
subsection (5) of 
section 135, if any
Amount 
remaining 
to be 
spent in 
succeeding 
Financial 
Years (in ₹)
Deficiency, 
if any
Amount 
(in ₹)
Date of 
transfer
1.
FY  2024-25
NA
NIL
NIL
NIL
NA
NIL
NA
2.
FY 2023-24
NA
NIL
NIL
NIL
NA
NIL
NA
3.
FY 2022-23
NA
NIL
NIL
NIL
NA
NIL
NA
8. 	
Whether any capital assets have been created or acquired through CSR amount spent 
in the Financial Year: 
No
9. 	
Specify the reason(s), if the Company has failed to spend two per cent of the average 
net profit as per Section 135(5) of the Companies Act, 2013 – 
Not applicable
Sd/-
(Chief Executive Officer or
Managing Director or Director)
Sd/-
(Chairman CSR Committee)


246
ANNUAL
ACCOUNTS
2025-26



	
247
Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Limited
BALANCE SHEET as at 31.03.2026
(₹ in crore)
Note No.
As at 31.03.2026
As at 31.03.2025
ASSETS
Non-Current Assets
 Property, Plant & Equipments
3.1
236.16
240.57
Capital Work in Progress
3.2
41.51
8.31
 Intangible Assets
3.4
6.75
6.38
 Financial Assets
(i) Loans 
4.2
1.56
0.58
(ii) Other Financial Assets
4.6
4.29
4.21
 Deferred Tax Assets (net)
11.2
32.18
21.94
 Other non-current assets
6.1
0.26
0.21
Total Non-Current Assets (A)
322.71
282.20
Current Assets
 Inventories
5.1
13.17
13.77
 Financial Assets
(i) Trade Receivables
4.3
1074.74
943.68
(ii) Cash & Cash equivalents
4.4
459.10
279.27
(iii) Other Bank Balances
4.5
970.90
800.90
(iv) Other Financial Assets
4.6
133.68
175.01
Current Tax Assets (Net)
11.1
110.82
39.55
Other Current Assets
6.2
173.39
148.42
Total Current Assets (B)
2935.80
2400.60
Total Assets (A+B)
3258.51
2682.80
EQUITY AND LIABILITIES
Equity
 Equity Share Capital
7.1
142.80
142.80
 Other Equity
7.2
2140.44
1899.05
Equity attributable to equityholders of the company
2283.24
2041.85
Total Equity (A)
2283.24
2041.85


248
Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Limited
BALANCE SHEET as at 31.03.2026
(₹ in crore)
Note No.
As at 31.03.2026
As at 31.03.2025
Liabilities
Non-Current Liabilities
Financial Liabilities
(i) Lease Liabilities 
8.2
0.89
0.86
(ii) Other Financial Liabilities
8.4
75.97
75.30
 Provisions
9.1
17.06
17.25
 Other Non-Current Liabilities
10.1
4.22
5.23
Total Non-Current Liabilities (B)
98.14
98.64
Current Liabilities
 Financial Liabilities
(i) Lease Liabilities 
8.2
0.56
0.29
(ii) Trade payables
(A) Total outstanding dues of micro, small and 
medium enterprises; and
 - 
 - 
(B) Total outstanding dues of Creditors other 
than micro, small and medium enterprises
8.3
276.45
200.12
(iii) Other Financial Liabilities
8.4
248.40
98.69
Other Current Liabilities
10.2
274.88
140.31
Provisions
9.1
76.84
102.90
Total Current Liabilities (C)
877.13
542.31
Total Equity and Liabilities (A+B+C)
3258.51
2682.80
The Accompanying Note No. 1 to 16 form an integral part of the Financial Statements.
Sd/-
(A. Mundhra)
Company Secretary
Sd/-
(Sudip Dasgupta)
CFO
DIN- 10802727
Sd/-
(Rajeev Kumar Sinha)
Director
DIN- 11363113
Sd/-
(Chaudhari Shivraj Singh)
Chairman-Cum-
Managing Director
DIN- 11416124
In terms of our report of even date attached
For DEOKI BIJAY& Co.
Chartered Accountants
Firm Registration No. 313105E
Sd/-
(CA Abhishek Kedia)
Partner
Membership No. 401607
UDIN : 26401607ETSGWS6975
Date: 21.04.2026
Place: Ranchi



	
249
Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Limited
STATEMENT OF PROFIT & LOSS For the Year Ended 31.03.2026
(₹ in crore)
Note 
No.
For the Year ended 
31.03.2026
For the Year ended 
31.03.2025 
Revenue from Operations (Net of levies)
12.1
2316.53
2102.76
Other Income
12.2
80.92
74.77
Total Income 
2397.45
2177.53
EXPENSES
Cost of Materials Consumed
13.1
28.30
30.63
Employee Benefits Expense
13.3
745.01
608.67
Finance Costs
13.4
0.08
0.09
Depreciation/Amortization/ Impairment expense
13.5
34.76
33.48
Other Expenses
13.8
765.66
622.52
Total Expenses 
1573.81
1295.39
Profit before exceptional items and Tax 
823.64
882.14
Exceptional Items
 - 
 - 
Profit before Tax 
823.64
882.14
Tax expenses
Total tax expenses
14.1
210.46
215.23
Profit for the period
613.18
666.91
Other Comprehensive Income
15.1
A (i) Items that will not be reclassified to profit or 
loss
4.17
-20.83
Less:(ii) Income tax relating to items that will not be 
reclassified to profit or loss
1.05
-5.24
B (i) Items that will be reclassified to profit or loss
 (ii) Income tax relating to items that will be 
reclassified to profit or loss
Total other comprehensive income
3.12
-15.59


250
Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Limited
STATEMENT OF PROFIT & LOSS For the Year Ended 31.03.2026
(₹ in crore)
Note 
No.
For the Year ended 
31.03.2026 
For the Year ended 
31.03.2025 
Total 
Comprehensive 
Income 
for 
the 
period (Comprising Profit (Loss) and Other 
Comprehensive Income for the period)
616.30
651.32
Profit attributable to: 
Owners of the company
613.18
666.91
Non-controlling interest
613.18
666.91
Other Comprehensive Income attributable to: 
Owners of the company
3.12
-15.59
Non-controlling interest
3.12
-15.59
Total Comprehensive Income attributable to: 
Owners of the company
616.30
651.32
Non-controlling interest 
616.30
651.32
Earnings per equity share (Face value ₹ 2 each):
(1) Basic
8.59
9.34
(2) Diluted
8.59
9.34
 The Accompanying Note No. 1 to 16 form an integral part of the Financial Statements. 
Sd/-
(A. Mundhra)
Company Secretary
Sd/-
(Sudip Dasgupta)
CFO
DIN- 10802727
Sd/-
(Rajeev Kumar Sinha)
Director
DIN- 11363113
Sd/-
(Chaudhari Shivraj Singh)
Chairman-Cum-
Managing Director
DIN- 11416124
In terms of our report of even date attached
For DEOKI BIJAY & Co.
Chartered Accountants
FRN- 313105E
Sd/-
(CA Abhishek Kedia)
Partner
Membership No. 401607
UDIN : 26401607ETSGWS6975
Date: 21.04.2026
Place: Ranchi



	
251
Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Limited
STATEMENT OF CASH FLOW (INDIRECT METHOD) For the Year Ended 31.03.2026
(₹ in crore)
For the year ended 
31.03.2026
For the year ended 
31.03.2025
A.
CASH FLOWS FROM OPERATING ACTIVITIES:
 
 
 
Profit before tax
823.64
882.14
 
Adjustment for:
 
 
 
Depreciation, amortisation and impairment expenses
34.76
33.48
 
Interest Income
-72.84
-55.21
 
Finance cost 
0.08
0.09
 
Profit / Loss on sale of Propert Plant & Equipment
-0.07
0.02
 
Liability & Provision write back 
-1.77
-13.89
 
Allowances and Provisions
10.40
0.79
 
Write off
0.34
12.29
 
Foreign Exchange rate variance
0.01
-0.03
 
Cash flows from operating activities before changes in 
following assets and liabilities
794.55
859.68
 
Trade Receivable
-141.47
39.90
 
Inventories
0.66
0.96
 
Loans and advances and other financial assets
40.27
-53.93
 
Other current and non current Assets
-25.02
-46.81
 
Trade payables
76.33
95.48
 
Other financial liabilities
150.93
2.89
 
Other current and non current liabilities
135.27
11.77
 
Provisions
-22.08
-56.24
 
Cash generated from operations
1009.44
853.70
 
Income Tax paid 
-293.02
-182.56
 
Net Cash Flow from Operating Activities
716.42
671.14
B.
CASH FLOWS FROM INVESTING ACTIVITIES
 
 
 
Payments for Property, Plant and Equipments and Intangible assets
-64.30
-41.90
 
Proceeds from Sale of Property, Plant and Equipments
0.11
0.07
 
Realisation of deposits/(Deposits) with Banks 
-170.00
-470.00
 
Interest received on Investment
72.84
55.21
 
Net Cash flow from Investing Activities
-161.35
-456.62
C.
CASH FLOWS FROM FINANCING ACTIVITIES
 
 
 
Proceeds from/Repayment of Borrowings
 
 
 
Repayment of lease liabilities (including interest)
-0.33
-0.25
 
Dividend paid on Equity shares
-374.91
-200.97
 
Net cash used in Financing Activities
-375.24
-201.22
 
Net increase/ decrease in Cash & Bank Balances (A+B+C)
179.83
13.30
 
Cash & cash equivalents as at the beginning of the year 
279.27
265.97
 
Cash & cash equivalents as at the end of the year. 
459.10
279.27
 
Reconciliation of Cash and Cash equivalents (Refer Note 4.4)
 
 
Components of Cash and Cash Equivalents
 
 
 
Balances with Banks
 
 - in Deposit Accounts
 
 
 - in Current Accounts
459.09 
279.25
 
Bank Balances outside India
- 
- 
 
Cheques, Drafts and Stamps in hand
- 
0.01
 
Cash in hand
- 
-


252
Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Limited
STATEMENT OF CASH FLOW (INDIRECT METHOD) For the Year Ended 31.03.2026
(₹ in crore)
 
For the year ended 
31.03.2026
For the year ended 
31.03.2025
 
Cash in hand outside India
-
- 
 
Others
0.01 
0.01
 
Total Cash and Cash Equivalents
459.10
279.27
1.  Reconciliation between the opening and closing balances in the balance sheet for liabilities arising from financing activities.
 
For the period ended 31st March 2026
 
 
Particulars
 
Finance Lease Liabilities
Opening balance as at 1st April 2025
 
1.15
Cash flows during the period
 
 
Non-cash changes due to:
 
 
Acquisitions under finance lease
 
 
Interest on borrowings
 
0.08 
Adjustment
 
0.22 
Closing balance as at 31st March 2026
1.45
For the period ended 31st March 2025
 
 
Particulars
 
Finance Lease Liabilities
Opening balance as at 1st April 2024
 
1.31
Cash flows during the year
 
 
Non-cash changes due to:
 
 
Acquisitions under finance lease
 
 
Interest on borrowings
 
0.09
Adjustment
 
-0.25
Closing balance as at 31st March 2025
 
1.15
The above statement of cash flow is prepared in accordance with the Indirect Method prescribed in Ind 
AS 7- 'Statement of Cash flows. 	
Sd/-
(A. Mundhra)
Company Secretary
Sd/-
(Sudip Dasgupta)
CFO
DIN-10802727
Sd/-
(Rajeev Kumar Sinha)
Director
DIN-11363113
Sd/-
(Chaudhari Shivraj Singh)
Chairman-Cum-
Managing Director
DIN-11416124
In terms of our report of even date attached
For DEOKI BIJAY& Co.
Chartered Accountants
FRN- 313105E
Sd/-
(CA Abhishek Kedia)
Partner
Membership No. 401607
UDIN : 26401607ETSGWS6975
Date: 21.04.2026
Place: Ranchi



	
253
Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Limited
STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31.03.2026
A. EQUITY SHARE CAPITAL
As at 31.03.2026
(₹ in crore)
Particulars
Balance as at 
01.04.2025
Changes in equity share 
capital during the year
Balance as at 31.03.2026
71,40,00,000 Equity Shares of ₹2/- each 
142.80
-
142.80 
As at 31.03.2025
 
 
(₹ in crore)
Particulars
Balance as at 
01.04.2024
Changes in equity share 
capital during the year
Balance as at 31.03.2025
14,28,000 Equity Shares of ₹1000/- each *
142.80
-
 142.80 
* In pursuant to resolutions passed by the Board in the Board meeting dated April 10, 2025 and the Shareholders in their EOGM dated April 28, 2025, the authorized share capital of the 
  Company was sub-divided from 1,500,000 equity shares of face value of ₹ 1,000 each to 750,000,000 Equity Shares of face value of ₹ 2 each.
B. OTHER EQUITY
 
 
 
 
 
 
As at 31.03.2026
 
 
 
 
(₹ in crore)
 
Reserves and Surplus
 
 
Particulars
Capital 
Redemption 
reserve
Capital  
Reserves
General 
Reserve
Retained 
Earnings
OCI - Remeasurement of 
Defined Benefits Plans 
(net of Tax)
Total 
 Balance as at 01.04.2025 
- 
- 
103.28
1763.59
32.18
1899.05
 Transfers and Other Adjustments 
- 
 
 
 
 
- 
 Interim Dividend 
- 
- 
- 
 (224.91)
- 
(224.91)
 Final Dividend 
- 
- 
- 
 (150.00)
- 
(150.00)
 Total Comprehensive Income 
 
 
 
 613.18 
3.12 
616.30 
 Balance as at 31.03.2026 
- 
- 
103.28 
 2,001.86 
35.30 
2,140.44 
As at 31.03.2025
 
 
 
 
 (₹ in crore)
 
Reserves and Surplus
 
 
Particulars
Capital 
Redemption 
reserve
Capital  
Reserves
General 
Reserve
Retained 
Earnings
OCI - Remeasurement of 
Defined Benefits Plans 
(net of Tax)
Total 
 Balance as at 01.04.2024 
- 
 
69.94
1331.1
47.77
1448.81
 Transfers and Other Adjustments 
- 
 
33.34 
 (33.45)
 
(0.11)
 Interim Dividend 
- 
 
 
 (150.00)
 
(150.00)
 Final Dividend 
- 
 
 
 (50.97)
 
(50.97)
 Total Comprehensive Income 
 
 
 
 666.91 
(15.59)
651.32 
 Balance as at 31.03.2025 
- 
 - 
103.28 
 1,763.59 
32.18 
1,899.05


254
Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE - 3.1 : PROPERTY, PLANT AND EQUIPMENTS
(₹ in crore)
 
Freehold Land
Other Land 
Building  
(including water 
supply, roads and 
culverts)
Plant and 
Equipments
Telecommunication
Furniture and 
Fixtures
Office Equipments
Vehicles
Surveyed Off 
Assets
Others
Total
Gross Carrying Amount:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As at 1 April 2024
 1.15 
 3.14 
 86.51 
 250.12 
 1.11 
 27.54 
 7.57 
 14.01 
 1.22 
 - 
 392.37 
Additions 
 - 
 - 
 1.48 
 26.35 
 0.58 
 3.05 
 0.66 
 1.81 
 
 - 
 33.93 
Deletions/Adjustments
 - 
 (0.09)
 (0.03)
 (3.76)
 
 (0.14)
 (0.01)
 (1.49)
- 0.02 
 - 
- 5.54 
As at 31st March 2025
 1.15 
 3.05 
 87.96 
 272.71 
 1.69 
 30.45 
 8.22 
 14.33 
 1.20 
 - 
 420.76 
As at 1 April 2025
 1.15 
 3.05 
 87.96 
 272.71 
 1.69 
 30.45 
 8.22 
 14.33 
 1.20 
 - 
 420.76 
Additions 
 - 
 0.54 
 3.81 
 14.63 
 0.21 
 1.20 
 8.85 
 0.33 
 0.04 
 - 
 29.61 
Deletions/Adjustments
 - 
 
 (0.05)
 (38.09)
- 0.02 
 (0.49)
 36.05 
 (0.83)
 (0.04)
 - 
- 3.47 
As at 31st March 2026
 1.15 
 3.59 
 91.72 
 249.25 
 1.88 
 31.16 
 53.12 
 13.83 
 1.20 
 - 
 446.90 
Accumulated Depreciation, 
Amortisation and Impairment* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As at 1 April 2024
 - 
 0.75 
 13.91 
 113.44 
 0.48 
 12.91 
 3.76 
 9.39 
 - 
 - 
 154.64 
Charge for the year
 - 
 0.23 
 2.03 
 23.78 
 0.21 
 2.26 
 0.87 
 0.92 
 - 
 - 
 30.30 
Deletions/Adjustments
 - 
- 0.03 
 - 
 (3.31)
 
 (0.13)
 (0.01)
 (1.27)
 
 - 
- 4.75 
As at 31st March 2025
 - 
 0.95 
 15.94 
 133.91 
 0.69 
 15.04 
 4.62 
 9.04 
 - 
 - 
 180.19 
As at 1 April 2025
 - 
 0.95 
 15.94 
 133.91 
 0.69 
 15.04 
 4.62 
 9.04 
 - 
 - 
 180.19 
Charge for the year
 - 
 0.26 
 2.06 
 16.86 
 0.24 
 2.41 
 9.29 
 0.99 
 1.03 
 - 
 33.14 
Deletions/Adjustments
 - 
 
 (0.04)
 (22.41)
- 0.02 
 (0.40)
 21.07 
 (0.79)
 
 - 
 (2.59)
As at 31st March 2026
 - 
 1.21 
 17.96 
 128.36 
 0.91 
 17.05 
 34.98 
 9.24 
 1.03 
 - 
 210.74 
Net Carrying Amount
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 - 
As at 31st March 2026
 1.15 
 2.38 
 73.76 
 120.89 
 0.97 
 14.11 
 18.14 
 4.59 
 0.17 
 - 
 236.16 
As at 31st March 2025
 1.15 
 2.10 
 72.02 
 138.80 
 1.00 
 15.41 
 3.60 
 5.29 
 1.20 
 - 
 240.57



	
255
8. Details of Funded Assets are as given below
(₹ in crore)
Funded assets class
Net Book Value as on 
01-04-2025
Depreciation  
for the year
Net Book Value as on 
31.03.2026
 Buildings
0.18
 - 
0.18
 Plant & Equip.
7.08
1.04
6.04
 Fur. & Fix.
0.06
 - 
0.06
Intangible asset
0.00
 - 
0.00
TOTAL
7.32
1.04
6.28
9. Movement in accumulated Impairment
(₹ in crore)
 
Plant & 
Equipments
Furniture & 
Fixtures 
Vehicle
Surveyed 
Off
Total
As at 1.04.2024
 0.02 
 0.04 
 - 
 
 0.06 
Charge for the year
 0.02 
 - 
 - 
 
 0.02 
Deletion/ Adjustment
 - 
 - 
 - 
 
 - 
As at 31.03.2025
 0.04 
 0.04 
 - 
 
 0.08 
As at 1.04.2025
 0.04 
 0.04 
 - 
 
 0.08 
Charge for the year/period
 0.03 
 - 
 0.15 
 1.03 
 1.21 
Deletion/ Adjustment
 - 
 - 
 - 
 
 - 
As at 31.03.2026
 0.07 
 0.04 
 0.15 
 1.03 
 1.29 
CMPDIL HQ, RI-5 and RI-1 is in possession of Freehold land. Process of getting the mutation of the above mentioned land is under process.
Notes :
1.	Plant and Machinery above include Plant and machineries including Stand by Equipment and stores and spares which satisfies criteria for recognition as PPE but 
not yet issued from stores
2.	Above Property, Plant and Equipment also include right of use assets; refer note 8.2.
3.	Depreciation has been provided as per Company's accounting policy.(Refer to note No 2)
4.	Other Land includes Right of use Asset as on 31.03.2026 is Rs. 2.26 cr (P.Y Rs. 1.72 cr) and accumulated amortization on the same as on 31.03.2026 is Rs. 1.04 
crores (P.Y. Rs. 0.78 cr)
5.	Depreciation & Amortization& Impairment charged to Profit & Loss A/c for the period ended 31.03.2026 is Rs. 34.76 crores.(P.Y. Rs. 33.48 cr) Depreciation related 
to funded assets is Rs. 1.04 crore (P.Y. Rs. 1.55 cr)	 	
	
	
	
6.	In pursuance of Ind AS,Gross value less accumulated depreciation as on 01.04.2015 was considered as carry value on transaction date.	
	
7.	Funded Assets: 
	
Funded assets include those financed by the Ministry of Coal through Promotional Funds and Science & Technology Funds, as well as by Coal India Ltd. (CIL) under 
its Research & Development Fund.


256
Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE - 3.2 : CAPITAL WIP
(₹ in crore)
 
Building (including 
water supply, roads and 
culverts)
Plant and Equipments
Total
Gross Carrying Amount:
 
 
 
As at 1st April 2024
 0.30 
 12.17 
 12.47 
Additions 
 7.53 
 2.00 
 9.53 
Capitalisation/ Deletions
 (0.54)
 (13.15)
 (13.69)
As at 31st March 2025
 7.29 
 1.02 
 8.31 
As at 1st April 2025
 7.29 
 1.02 
 8.31 
Additions
 33.04 
 0.31 
 33.35 
Capitalisation/ Deletions
 (0.15)
 
 (0.15)
As at 31st March 2026
 40.18 
 1.33 
 41.51 
Accumulated Impairment
 
 
 - 
As at 1st April 2024
 - 
 - 
 - 
Charge for the year
 - 
 - 
 - 
Deletions/Adjustments
 - 
 - 
 - 
As at 31st March 2025
 - 
 - 
 - 
As at 1st April 2025
 - 
 - 
 - 
Charge for the year
 - 
 - 
 - 
Deletions/Adjustments
 - 
 - 
 - 
As at 31st March 2026
 - 
 - 
 - 
Net Carrying Amont
 
 
 - 
As at 31st March 2026
 40.18 
 1.33 
 41.51 
As at 31st March 2025
 7.29 
 1.02 
 8.31



	
257
(₹ in crore)
1. Ageing schedule of Capital-work-in Progress (Gross):
 
Amount in Capital work in Progress as at 31-03-2026
 
Less than 1 year
1-2 years
2-3 years
Total
Projects in progress:
 
 
 
 
BUILDING
 
 
 
 
Construction of Quarters at CMPDI RI VI Colony
32.35
4.53
0.00
36.88
Construction of Children park in Korba Camp of CMP
0.09
 
 
0.09
Construction of Children park in Kusmunda Camp of
0.10
 
 
0.10
CONSTRUCTION OF NEW LAB BUILDING AT CMPDI RI-V
0.68
 
 
0.68
WATER ARRANGEMENT AT KORBA CAMP
0.20
 
 
0.20
CONSTRUCTION OF SPORTS COMPLEX IN CMPDI RI5
0.02
 
 
0.02
WIP STC BUILDING
1.50
0.63
 
2.13
Composter Machine with in built shredding
0.01
 
 
0.01
EXTENSION OF ENV LAB WIP
0.05
 
 
0.05
WIP-VERTIFIED TILES LAYING
0.02
 
 
0.02
PLANT & EQUIPMENT
 
 
 
 
5kW & 10 kW Grid Connected Solar Tree with Net Met
0.14
 
 
0.14
Lift C43 to C53 & B157-B178_Frankson Automation
0.83
0.36
 
1.19
Projects temporarily suspended:
 
 
 
 
BUILDING
 
 
 
 
PLANT & EQUIPMENT
 
 
 
 
GRAND TOTAL
35.99
5.52
0.00
41.51
Capital-Work-in Progress (CWIP) (Gross)
 
 
 
 
2. Overdue for material capital-work-in progress (Gross):
 To be completed in 
 
 
 
Less than 1 year
1-2 years
2-3 years
Total
Projects in progress:
 
 
 
 
Building (including water supply, roads and culverts)
 
 
 
 
Plant and Equipments
 
 
 
 
Railway Sidings
 
 
 
 
Total


258
1. Ageing schedule of Capital-work-in Progress (Gross): 
(₹ in crore)
 
Amount in Capital work in Progress as at 31-03-2025
Less than 1 year
1-2 years
2-3 years
More than 3 years
Total
Projects in progress:
 
 
 
 
 
BUILDING
 
 
 
 
 
New water supply pipeline to CMPDI Colony RI7
0.11
 
 
 
0.11
CONSTRUCTION OF SCARPYARD IN CMPDI COLONY
0.05
 
 
 
0.05
New Construction of class room for Gondwana School HQ
0.34
 
 
 
0.34
Rennovation of BDD floor - HQ CMPDIL
0.84
 
 
 
0.84
Construction of Quarters at CMPDI RI VI Colony HQ
4.58
 
 
 
4.58
WIP STC BUILDING HQ
0.64
 
 
 
0.64
Parking Shed with roof of polycarbonate Sheet RI4
0.51
 
 
 
0.51
RCC Storm Water Drain CMPDI Nagpur Phase II RI4
0.08
 
 
 
0.08
PLANT & EQUIPMENT
 
 
 
 
 
solar power plant HQ
0.66
 
 
 
0.66
Lift C43 to C53 & B157-B178_Frankson Automation HQ
0.36
 
 
 
0.36
Projects temporarily suspended:
 
 
 
 
 
BUILDING
 
 
 
 
 
Lakhanpur Residential building for Gopalpur camp of RI-7
 
 
 
0.14
0.14
PLANT & EQUIPMENT
 
 
 
 
 
GRAND TOTAL
8.17
 - 
 - 
0.14
8.31
Capital-Work-in Progress (CWIP) (Gross)
(₹ in crore)
2. Overdue for material capital-work-in progress (Gross):
 To be completed in 
 
 
Less than 1 year
1-2 years
2-3 years
More than 3 years
 
Projects in progress:
 
 
 
 
 
Building (including water supply, roads and culverts)
 
 
 
 
 
Plant and Equipments
 
 
 
 
 
Railway Sidings
 
 
 
 
 
Total



	
259
Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE - 3.4 : OTHER INTANGIBLE ASSETS
(₹ in crore)
 
Computer Software 
Total
Gross Carrying Amount:
 
 
As at 1 April 2024
 36.05 
 36.05 
Additions
 2.08 
 2.08 
Deletions/Adjustments
 
 - 
As at 31st March 2025
 38.13 
 38.13 
As at 1 April 2025
 38.13 
 38.13 
Additions
 3.03 
 3.03 
Deletions/Adjustments 
 - 
 - 
As at 31st March 2026
 41.16 
 41.16 
Accumulated Amortisation and Impairment 
As at 1 April 2024
 27.03 
 27.03 
Charge for the year
 4.73 
 4.73 
Deletions/Adjustments
 (0.01)
 (0.01)
As at 31st March 2025
 31.75 
 31.75 
As at 1 April 2025
 31.75 
 31.75 
Charge for the year
 2.66 
 2.66 
Deletions/Adjustments
 - 
 - 
As at 31st March 2026
 34.41 
 34.41 
Net Carrying Amont
 
 
As at 31st March 2026
 6.75 
 6.75 
As at 31st March 2025
 6.38 
 6.38


260
Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE - 4.2 : LOANS 
(₹ in crore)
As at 31.03.2026
As at 31.03.2025
Non Current
Loans to Employees
 - Secured, considered good
 1.56 
 0.58 
 - Unsecured, considered good
 - 
 - 
 - Have significant increase in credit risk
 - 
 - 
 - Credit impaired
 - 
 - 
 1.56 
 0.58 
Less: Allowance for doubtful loans
 - 
 - 
Total
 1.56 
 0.58



	
261
Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE - 4.3 : TRADE RECEIVABLES 
(₹ in crore)
 
As at 31.03.2026
As at 31.03.2025
Current
 
 
Trade receivables
 
 
 - Secured, considered good
 - 
 - 
 - Unsecured, considered good
1074.74
943.68
 Have significant increase in credit risk 
 
 
 Credit impaired
13.87
3.47
 
1088.61
947.15
 
 
 
Less : Allowance for expected credit loss
13.87
3.47
 
 
 
Total
1074.74
943.68
 
 
 
As at 31.03.2026
As at 31.03.2025
The details of movement in allowance for  
expected credit loss
Balance at the beginning of the year
3.47
2.68
Recognised during the year
10.40
0.79
Writeback during the year
-
-
Balance at the end of the year
13.87
3.47


262
As at 31.03.2025
Trade Receivables ageing schedule 
Outstanding for following periods from transaction date 
Total
Particulars
Less than  
6 months 
6 months 
1 year 
1-2 
years 
2-3  
years 
More than 
3 years 
(i) Undisputed Trade receivables – considered good 
 692.51 
 122.16 
28.23
36.64
67.61
947.15
(ii) Undisputed Trade Receivables - which have 
significant increase in credit risk
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) Undisputed Trade Receivables – credit impaired
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) Disputed Trade Receivables– considered good 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) Disputed Trade Receivables – which have 
significant increase in credit risk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(vi) Disputed Trade Receivables – credit impaired 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total
 692.51 
 122.16  28.23 
 36.64 
 67.61 
947.15 
Allowance for expected credit loss
 
 
 
 
 3.47 
 3.47 
Expected credit losses (Loss allowance provision) -%
 
 
 
 
5.13%
0.37%
As at 31.03.2026
Trade Receivables ageing schedule 
Outstanding for following periods from transaction date 
Total
Particulars
Less than 
6 months 
6 months 
1 year 
1-2 
years 
2-3  
years 
More than 
3 years 
(i) Undisputed Trade receivables – considered good 
 820.66 
 107.01 
59.29
17.29
84.36 1088.61
(ii) Undisputed Trade Receivables - which have 
significant increase in credit risk
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) Undisputed Trade Receivables – credit impaired
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) Disputed Trade Receivables– considered good 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) Disputed Trade Receivables – which have 
significant increase in credit risk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(vi) Disputed Trade Receivables – credit impaired 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total
 820.66 
 107.01  59.29 
 17.29 
 84.36 1,088.61 
Allowance for expected credit loss
 
 
 
 
 13.87 
 13.87 
Expected credit losses (Loss allowance provision) - %
 
 
 
 
16.44%
1.27%
Trade Receivables includes dues from CIL and Subsidiaries within group ₹838.25 (Previous Year ₹748.44 cr.) and 
allowances recognised thereon Nil (Previous Year Nil). Dues from outside group include ₹250.36 cr. (Previous Year 
₹198.71 cr.) and allowances recognised thereon ₹13.87 cr (Previous Year ₹3.47 cr.)



	
263
Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE - 4.4 : CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS
(₹ in crore)
As at 31.03.2026
As at 31.03.2025
(a) Balances with Banks
 - in Deposit Accounts
 - in Current Accounts
459.09
279.25
(b) Bank Balances outside India
 - 
 - 
(c)
Cheques, Drafts and Stamps in hand
 
 0.01 
(d) Cash in hand
 - 
 - 
(e) Others
 0.01 
 0.01 
Total Cash and Cash Equivalents
459.10
279.27
1. Out of the Balance with Bank of Rs. 459.09 Cr., fund related bank balance is Rs. 97.80 Cr as given below
Name of funds 
As at 31.03.2026
As at 31.03.2025
MOC (Promotional + Non CIL)
1.59
1.62
MOC (R&D)
10.62
2.96
NMET
3.92
0.52
CIL (R&D)
81.67
2.49
Total
97.80
7.59
2.	 Others include Imprest balances.	 	
3.	 Cash and cash equivalents comprises cash in hand and at bank, sweep accounts and term deposits held with banks with 
original maturities of three months or less.	 	
Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE - 4.5 : OTHER BANK BALANCES
(` in crore)
As at 31.03.2026
As at 31.03.2025
Balances with Banks
  - Deposit accounts
 970.00 
 800.00
  - Deposit accounts (For specific purposes)
 0.90
 0.90
Total
 970.90 
 970.90 
1.	 Deposit for specific purposes is bank deposits held under GeM account 	 	
	
2.	 Other Bank Balances comprise Deposits - for specific purposes and bank deposits which are expected to realise in cash within 
12 months after the reporting date.


264
Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE - 4.6 : OTHER FINANCIAL ASSETS
(₹ in crore)
 
As at 31.03.2026
 
As at 31.03.2025
Non Current
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Security Deposit 
4.19
 
4.11
Less : Allowance for doubtful Security deposits
0.04
 
0.04
 
4.15
 
4.07
 
 
 
 
Bank Deposits with more than 12 months maturity
0.14
 
0.14
 
 
 
 
TOTAL
4.29
 
4.21
 
 
 
 
Current
 
 
 
Security Deposit
0.01
 
 
Less : Allowance for doubtful Security deposits
 
 
 - 
Current Account Balance with CIL
 - 
 
61.58
Interest accrued 
22.99
 
30.93
 
 
 
 
Other Deposit and Receivables*
 110.68 
 
 82.50 
Less : Allowance for doubtful claims
 - 
 
 - 
 
 110.68 
 
 82.50 
 
 
 
 
TOTAL
 133.68 
 
 175.01 
 
 
 
 
4.6.1 The details of movement in Allowance for Security 
Deposit (Current and Non-Current)
 31.03.2026 
31.03.2025
Balance at the beginning of the year/period
0.04
0.04
Recognised during the year/period
Writeback during the year/period
Balance at the end of the year/period
0.04
0.04
 
 
 
 
Claims & other receivables*
31.03.2026
31.03.2025
Receivable From Ind AS 115
81.14
69.90
Claims Receivable & Others
29.54
12.60
TOTAL
110.68
82.50



	
265
Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE - 5.1 : INVENTORIES
(₹ in crore)
As at 31.03.2026
As at 31.03.2025
Stores, Spares and other inventories 
13.84
14.50
Less: Provision for slow-moving, non-moving, 
and obsolete inventories
0.67
0.73
13.17
13.77
5.1.1  The inventory of stores and spares comprises items that fall into the categories of slow-moving, non- 
 moving, and obsolete. Impairment allowances are recognized for these items as per the company's 
 policy. 
      The details of movement in impairment allowance for slow-moving, non-moving and obsolete Stores, 
Spares, and other inventories:
As at 31.03.2026
As at 31.03.2025
Balance at the beginning of the year
0.73
1.17
Recognised during the year
-
-
Derecognised during the year
(0.06)
(0.44)
Balance at the end of the year
0.67
0.73
Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE 6.1 : OTHER NON-CURRENT ASSETS
(₹ in crore)
As at 31.03.2026
As at 31.03.2025
Capital Advances 
0.26
0.21
 Less : Allowance for doubtful advances
 - 
 - 
 Total
0.26
0.21


266
Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE - 6.2 : OTHER CURRENT ASSETS
(₹ in crore)
As at 31.03.2026
As at 31.03.2025
Advance payment of statutory dues
 0.09 
 0.04 
 Less : Allowance for doubtful Statutory dues
 - 
 - 
 0.09 
 0.04 
Other Advances and Deposits *
 143.46 
 126.58 
 Less : Allowance for doubtful other depsoits  
 and advances 
 0.24 
 0.24 
 143.22 
 126.34 
 Input Tax Credit Receivable
 30.08 
 22.04 
Total
 173.39 
 148.42 
Other Advances and Deposits *
1)
31.03.2026
31.03.2025
EMPLOYEE ADVANCE
0.39
0.40
T.A.
1.17
1.88
MEDICAL ADVANCE
0.23
0.24
INCOME TAX UNDER PROTEST**
92.68
83.00
OTHERS
48.99
41.06
Total
143.46
126.58
2)
**Income tax paid under protest is Rs. 92.68 crs. Out of this Rs. 0.59 Cr relates to A.Y. 2010-11, Rs. 25.12 Cr 
relates to 2017-18, Rs. 32.44 Cr relates to 2018-19, Rs. 25.69 crore related A.Y. 2020-21, Rs. 5.72 crore relates 
to A.Y. 2021-22 & Rs. 3.12 Cr relates to AY: 2024-25.
3)
Other Advance & Deposit Includes deposit under protest and refund yet to be received for Income tax ₹83.00 
Crores and Service Tax cases ₹ 7.31 crores etc.
4)
*Includes Excess CSR of Rs. 2.31 cr.
6.2.1 The details of movement in Allowance for bad and doubtful advances and deposits 
 (Current and Non-Current)
31.03.2026
31.03.2025
Balance at the beginning of the year
0.24
 0.25 
Recognised during the year
 - 
 - 
Utilised during the year
 - 
 0.01 
Balance at the end of the year
0.24
 0.24



	
267
Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE - 7.1 : EQUITY SHARE CAPITAL
(₹ in crore)
As at 31.03.2026
As at 31.03.2025
Authorised
75,00,00,000 Equity Shares of ₹2/- each
150.00
150.00
 150.00 
 150.00 
Issued, Subscribed and Paid-up
4,48,55,000 Equity Shares of ₹ 2/- each  
allotted as fully paid up in Cash 
8.97
8.97
66,91,45,000 Equity Shares of ₹ 2/- each 
133.83
133.83
allotted as fully paid up for consideration received 
other than cash in persuent to Conversion of Loan into 
Equity and Bonus issues **
Total
142.80
142.80
1
Shares in the company held by each shareholder holding more than 5% Shares
Name of Shareholder
No. of Shares held  
(Face value of ₹ 2 each)
% of  
Total Shares
Coal India Limited
71,40,00,000
85%
2
Reconciliation of equity shares outstanding at the beginning and at the end of reporting period:-
Particular
No. of Shares 
Amount
Balance as on 01.04.2020
3,80,800
38.08
Changes During the F.Y 2020-21
10,47,200 
104.72
(Issue of Bonus Shares during the FY:2020-21)
 
 
Balance as on 31.03.2021
14,28,000 
142.80
Balance as on 01.04.2021
14,28,000 
142.80
Addition During the F.Y 2021-22
 -
 
Balance as on 31.03.2022
14,28,000
142.80
Balance as on 01.04.2022
14,28,000
142.80
Addition During the F.Y 2022-23
 -
 
Balance as on 31.03.2023
14,28,000 
142.80
Balance as on 01.04.2023
14,28,000
142.80
Addition During the F.Y 2023-24
 -
 
Balance as on 31.03.2024
14,28,000 
142.80
Balance as on 01.04.2024
14,28,000 
142.80
Addition During the F.Y. 2024-25
 -
 
Balance as on 31.03.2025
14,28,000 
142.80
Balance as on 01.04.2025
14,28,000 
142.80
Addition During the F.Y.2025-26
 -
 
Balance as on 31.03.2026*
71,40,00,000 
142.80
The Company has only one class of Equity Shares having a face value of Rs. 2*/- per share	
	
*	 In pursuant to resolutions passed by the Board in the Board meeting dated April 10, 2025 and the Shareholders in their EOGM 
dated April 28, 2025, the authorized share capital of the Company was sub-divided from 1,500,000 equity shares of face value 
of ₹1,000 each to 750,000,000 Equity Shares of face value of ₹2 each. 	
	
	
	
**	 The number of shares issued in cash & consideration received other than cash has been regrouped.


268
Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE - 7.2 : OTHER EQUITY
(₹ in crore)
 
As at 31.03.2026
As at 31.03.2025
a) General Reserve
 
 
 
 103.28 
 
 103.28 
b) Retained Earnings
 
 
 
2,001.86 
 
1,763.59 
c) Other comprehensive income that will not be  
    reclassified to profit or loss
 35.30 
 
32.18 
TOTAL
 
 
 
 2,140.44 
 
1,899.05
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) General Reserve
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 As at 31.03.2026 
 
 As at 31.03.2025 
Balance at the beginning of the year
 
103.28
 
69.94 
Transfers and Other Adjustments
 
 
 
33.34 
Balance at the end of the year
 
 
103.28 
 
 103.28 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) Retained Earnings
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 As at 31.03.2026 
 
 As at 31.03.2025 
Balance at the beginning of the year
 
1,763.59 
 
1,331.10 
Profit for the year
 
 
 
 613.18 
 
 666.91 
Interim Dividend
 
 
 
 (224.91)
 
 (150.00)
Final Dividend
 
 
 
 (150.00)
 
 (50.97)
Transfers and Other Adjustments
 
 
 
 (33.45)
Balance at the end of the year
 
 
 2,001.86 
 
1,763.59 
The dividend proposed by the Board of Directorsis subject to the approval of the shareholders in the Annual General 
meeting.
 
(c) Other Comprehensive Income items that will not be reclassified to profit or loss*
 As at 31.03.2026 
 As at 31.03.2025 
Balance at the beginning of the year 
32.18 
 47.77 
Other Comprehensive Income during the period
3.12
(15.59)
Adjustment during the year/period
 
Balance at the end of the year
35.30 
 32.18 
*Represents net actuarial gains / (losses) on defined benefit plans (net of tax).



	
269
8.2.3 Amounts recognised in profit or loss
Particulars
 As at 31-03-2026 
 As at 31-03-2025 
Depreciation and amortisation expense for right-of-use assets
 0.25 
 0.22 
Interest expense on lease liabilities
 0.08 
 0.09 
Expense relating to short-term leases
 
- 
Gain or loss arising from sale and leaseback transaction
- 
- 
Total
 0.33 
0.31 
8.2.4 Total Cash outflow for Leases disclosed in the cash flow statement
Particulars
 As at 31-03-2026 
 As at 31-03-2025 
Payment of finance lease liabilities
 0.33 
 0.25 
Cash Outlow relating to short term leases
- 
- 
TOTAL
 0.33 
0.25 
Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE - 8.2 : LEASE LIABILITIES
(₹ in crore)
Non - Current
 As at 31.03.2026 
 As at 31.03.2025 
Balance at the closing of the period
 0.89 
0.86 
Current 
 
 
Balance at the closing of the year
 0.56 
0.29 
The details of movement in Finance Lease Liabilities
Particulars
 As at 31.03.2026 
 As at 31.03.2025 
Non 
Current
Current
Total
Non 
Current
Current
Total
Balance at the beginning of the year
 0.86 
0.29 
 1.15 
1.08
0.23
1.31
Additions during the year
 - 
 - 
 - 
-
 - 
 - 
Finance cost accrued during the period
 0.08 
 
 0.08 
0.09
 
0.09
Payment/Adjustment of lease liabilities
 (0.05)
0.27 
 0.22 
(0.31)
 0.06 
 (0.25)
Balance at the closing of the period/year
0.89 
0.56 
 1.45 
0.86
0.29
1.15
8.2.1 Maturity Analysis of Lease Liability on an undiscounted basis (Non-Current and Current):
Particulars
 As at 31.03.2026 
 As at 31.03.2025 
Upto 1 Year
 0.56 
 0.27 
1-5 Years
 0.81 
 0.71 
More than 5 Years
 0.35 
 0.37 
8.2.2 Changes in the carrying value of right-of-use assets as at 31.03.2026
Particular
Net Carrying Value 
at the beginning of 
the year
Addition 
during the 
period
Deletion 
during the 
period
Net Carrying Value 
at the closing of the 
period
Depreciation/ 
Amortisation 
for the period
Land
0.93
 0.54
 
1.22
0.25
Changes in the carrying value of right-of-use assets as at 31.03.2025
Particular
Net Carrying Value 
at the beginning of 
the year
Addition 
during the 
year / period
Deletion during 
the year / period
Net Carrying Value 
at the closing of 
the year
Depreciation/ 
Amortisation for 
the year
Land
1.15
 
 
0.93
0.22


270
Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE - 8.3 : TRADE PAYABLES
(₹ in crore)
As at 31-03-2026 
As at 31-03-2025 
Current
Total outstanding dues of micro, small and medium enterprises
 - 
 - 
Total outstanding dues of Creditors other than micro, small and 
medium enterprises
 276.45 
 200.12 
 Total
 276.45 
 200.12 
Trade payables - Total outstanding dues of Micro & Small enterprises
31.03.2026
31.03.2025
a)	 Principal & Interest amount remaining unpaid but not due as at period end
Nil
Nil
b) 	 Interest paid by the Company in terms of Section 16 of Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006, along with the amount of the 
payment made to the supplier beyond the appointed day during the period
Nil
Nil
c) 	 Interst due and payable for the period of delay in making payment (which 
have been paid but beyound the appointed day during the year) but without 
adding the interest specified under Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
Development Act, 2006,
Nil
Nil
d) 	 Interest accrued and remaining unpaid as at period end
Nil
Nil
e) 	 Further interest remaining due and payable even in the succeeding years, 
until such date when the interest dues as above are actually paid to the 
small enterprise
Nil
Nil
As at 31.03.2026
Trade Payables aging schedule
Outstanding for following periods from transaction date
Particulars
Less than 1 year
1-2 Years
 2-3 years  More than 3 years 
 Total 
i) MSME
-
-
-
-
-
ii) Others
 267.29 
 5.07 
2.25
 1.84 
276.45 
iii) Disputed dues - MSME
-
-
-
-
-
iv) Disputed dues - Others
-
-
-
-
-
Unbilled dues
-
-
-
-
-
As at 31.03.2025
Trade Payables aging schedule
Outstanding for following periods from transaction date
Particulars
Less than 1 year
1-2 Years
 2-3 years  More than 3 years 
 Total 
i) MSME
-
-
-
-
-
ii) Others
194.02
1.23
 0.36 
 4.51 
200.12
iii) Disputed dues - MSME
-
-
-
-
-
iv) Disputed dues - Others
-
-
-
-
-
Unbilled dues
-
-
-
-
-



	
271
Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE - 8.4 : OTHER FINANCIAL LIABILITIES
(₹ in crore)
As at 31-03-2026 
As at 31-03-2025 
Non Current 
Security Deposits
75.97
75.30
Others 
-
-
 Total
75.97
75.30
Current
Current Account with
 - CIL 
 51.29 
 - 
 - IICM
 0.40 
 0.20 
Security Deposits
20.52
22.45
Payable for Capital Expenditure
 16.51 
 7.11 
Liability for Employee Benefits
 152.76 
 64.69 
Others 
6.92
4.24
 Total
248.40
98.69
Pursuant to the order of the Hon’ble High Court of Jabalpur dated 07 January 2026, the Board of Directors of 
the CIL approved the upgradation of pay scales of executives (up to mid-level) across the Coal India Limited 
Group, payable with effect from 23.08.2023. A provision of ₹ 90.13 crore has been recognised towards this 
revision for the period from 23.08.2023 to 31.12.2025. The revised salary structure has been implemented 
since 01.01.2026 and payment are being disbursed accordingly. Also refer Note no. 13.3.


272
Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE - 9.1 : PROVISIONS
(₹ in crore)
As at 31-03-2026 
As at 31-03-2025 
Non Current
Employee Benefits
 - Gratuity*
1.62
 9.53 
 - Leave Encashment**
10.28
 1.64 
 - Post Retirement Medical Benefits***
 - 
 - 
 - Other Employee Benefits
5.15
 6.07 
Other Provisions
 - 
 - 
Others 
0.01
 0.01 
Total 
17.06
 17.25 
Current
Employee Benefits
 - Gratuity*
 - 
 - 
 - Leave Encashment**
 - 
 - 
 - Post Retirement Medical Benefits***
 - 
 - 
 - Other Employee Benefits
76.84
 102.90 
 Total 
76.84
102.90
NOTE:	 	
	
	
	
9.1.	
The liability of Gratuity (net of plan assets) is inclusive of amount recoverable from the gratuity trust for 
benefits paid.
9.1.1	 The details of movement in Provisions (Current and Non-Current)
	
The position and movement of various provisions except those relating to Gratuity, Leave encashment and 
Post-Retirement Medical benefits 
(₹ in crore)
As at 31.03.2026
Balance at the 
beginning of the year
Charged during 
the year
Utilised/adjusted 
during the year
Balance at the 
end of the year
Other Employee Benefit
 108.97 
68.65
(95.63)
 81.99 
Others
 0.01 
0.01
As at 31.03.2025
Balance at the 
beginning of the year
Charged during 
the year 
Utilised/adjusted 
during the year
Balance at the 
end of the year
Other Employee Benefit
139.58
39.84
(70.45)
108.97 
Others
0.01
-
-
0.01



	
273
Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE - 10.1 : OTHER NON CURRENT LIABILITIES
(₹ in crore)
As at 31.03.2026
As at 31.03.2025
Others*
 4.22 
 5.23 
 Total
 4.22 
 5.23 
* Includes CIL R&D Capital Reserve, Promotional Regional Exploration Capital Reserve & UNDP
NOTE - 10.2 : OTHER CURRENT LIABILITIES
(₹ in crore)
As at 31.03.2026
As at 31.03.2025
Statutory Dues 
102.52
94.15
Advance from customers / others
8.05
5.22
*Others liabilities
164.31
40.94
 Total 
274.88
140.31
*Other Liabilities includes funds received from Ministry of Coal & Ministry of Mines. It includes bills passed but 
 payments not made due to fund receivable is awaited from Ministry.
10.2.1 Other Liabilities*
(₹ in crore)
As at 31.03.2026
As at 31.03.2025
Energy Coal S&T Grant
36.68
18.78
Advance received for R&D & S&T
9.88
12.14
R&D Fund
110.23
5.47
Other Funds
7.52
4.55
Total
164.31
40.94


274
Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE - 11.1 : TAX ASSETS / LIABILITIES
(₹ in crore)
 
As at 31.03.2026 
As at 31.03.2025 
Income Tax Assets
 
 
 
Advance Income Tax balance at the beginning of the year
 442.87 
 339.73 
Deposits including TDS Receivables /(Refund) during the year
 290.23 
 237.30 
Set off to Income Tax Liabilities after completion of assessment 
(contra adjustment)
 - 
(134.16)
 
 
 
 
 
Advance Income Tax balance at the end of the year/period (A)
 733.10 
442.87 
 
 
 
 
 
Income Tax Liabilities
 
 
 
Income Tax Provision at the begening of the year
 403.32 
 268.46 
Tax Expense - current year (Refer note 14.1)
 217.91 
 222.64 
Tax Expense - earlier years (Refer note 14.1)
 - 
(3.13)
Income tax relating to items that will not be reclassified to profit or 
loss (Refer note 15.1)
1.05 
(5.24)
Income tax relating to items that will be reclassified to profit or loss 
(Refer note 15.1)
 - 
 - 
Set off to Income Tax Assets after completion of assessment (contra 
adjustment)
 - 
(79.41)
Income Tax Provision at the end of the year/period (B)
 622.28 
 403.32 
 
 
 
 
 
Net income tax asset/(liabilities) at the end(A-B)
 110.82 
39.55 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 As at 31.03.2026 
 As at 31.03.2025 
Current
 
 
 
Income Tax Assets (net)
 
 110.82 
 39.55 
Income Tax Liabilities (net)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 110.82 
39.55



	
275
Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE - 11.2 : DEFERRED TAX ASSETS/LIABILITIES
(₹ in crore)
 
 
 
Balance 
as on 
01.04.2024
 
Recognised/
(reversed) in 
profit and loss 
during the year
 
Recognised 
in other 
comprehensive 
income during 
the year
Balance 
as on 
31.03.2025
 
Recognised/
(reversed) 
in profit and 
loss during 
the year
 
Recognised 
in other 
comprehensive 
income during 
the year
 
Balance 
as on 
31.03.2026
Deferred Tax Assets: (A)
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
Provision for Doubtful Advances, 
Claims and Debts
 0.67 
 
0.20 
 
 
 0.87 
 
2.62 
 
 
 3.49 
Employee Benefits
 29.82 
 
4.57 
 
 
 34.39 
 
3.56 
 
 
37.95 
Others
 0.06 
 
0.12 
 
 
 0.18 
 
 (0.01)
 
 
 0.17 
TOTAL OF (A)
30.55 
 
4.89 
 
- 
35.44 
 
6.17 
 
- 
 41.61 
Deferred Tax Liability: (B)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Related to Property, Plant and 
Equipment and Intangible assets
 12.89 
 
0.61 
 
 
 13.50 
 
 (4.07)
 
 
 9.43 
Others
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TOTAL OF (B)
12.89 
 
0.61 
 
- 
13.50 
 
 (4.07)
 
- 
 9.43 
Net Deferred Tax Asset/ (Deferred 
Tax Liability) (C= A - B)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Remeasurement of Defined benefit 
Plan DTL(+)/DTA(-) (D)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Net Deferred Tax Asset (E = C + D)
17.66 
 
4.28 
 
- 
21.94 
 
10.24 
 
- 
 32.18 
As at 31.03.2025
As at 31.03.2026
Disclosed as:
Deferred TaxAssets
 
 
 
 
 
35.44
41.61
Deferred Tax Liability
 
 
 
 
 
13.50 
 9.43 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21.94
2.18


276
Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE - 12.1 : REVENUE FROM OPERATIONS
(₹ in crore)
For the year ended
For the year ended
31.03.2026
31.03.2025
Sales of Services
 2,733.73 
 2,478.18 
Less : Statutory Levies
 417.20 
 375.42 
Revenue From Operations 
 2,316.53 
 2,102.76 
1. 	
Sales includes services to CIL and Subsidiaries within Group Gross amount Rs. 1846.11 crores 
(Previous year Rs. 1664.60 crores) and levies thereon Rs. 281.62 crores (Previous Year Rs. 253.92 
crores); Services outside group includes Gross Rs. 887.62 crores (Previous year Rs. 813.58 crores) 
and levies thereon recognised Rs. 135.58 crores (Previous year Rs. 121.50 crores). Total sales 
includes provisional sales of Rs. 17.98 crores 	 	
	
	
	
	
	
	
2.	
Contract Assets – Unbilled Revenue (Ind AS 115 Disclosure)	
	
	
	
As of 31st March 2026, unbilled revenue of ₹17.98 crore (without GST) and as of 31st March 2025, 
unbilled revenue of ₹16.03 crore (without GST) has been recognized under Contract Assets as per 
Ind AS 115. This represents revenue from completed performance obligations where billing and 
acceptance are pending. Under legally enforceable contracts, margins on such unbilled revenue 
are recognized at cost in line with the Company’s conservative policy. The Company expects to bill 
and collect these amounts within the next operating cycle based on contractual terms and historical 
experience. Contract assets were assessed for recoverability with no impairment indicators noted. The 
Company applies the simplified Ind AS 109 approach based on credit risk and historical recoveries.



	
277
Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE - 12.2 : OTHER INCOME
(₹ in crore)
For the year ended
For the year ended
31.03.2026
31.03.2025
Interest Income
 72.84 
 55.21 
Other non-operating income (net of expenses directly 
attributable to such income)
 - 
 - 
Profit on Sale of Assets
 0.07 
 0.04 
Gain on Foreign exchange Transactions
 - 
 0.04 
Provision written back
 0.06 
 0.44 
Liabilities written back
 1.71 
 13.45 
Miscellaneous Income
 6.24 
 5.59 
Total
 80.92 
 74.77 
Details of provision written back
For loans to body corporate and employees (4.2)
-
-
For trade receivables (4.3)
-
-
For financial deposits and receivables (4.6)
-
-
For inventories (5.1)
0.06
0.44
For other non current deposits and advances (6.1)
 - 
 - 
For other current deposits and advances (6.2)
 - 
 - 
Total provision written back during the year
 0.06 
 0.44 
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 
NOTE - 13.1 : COST OF MATERIALS CONSUMED
(` in crore)
For the year ended
For the year ended
31.03.2026
31.03.2025
Timber
 0.01 
 - 
Oil & Lubricants
 13.61 
 13.91 
Spares
 0.37 
 0.31 
Other Consumable Stores & Spares
 14.31 
 16.41 
Total 
 28.30 
 30.63


278
Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE - 13.3 : EMPLOYEE BENEFITS EXPENSES
(₹ in crore)
For the year ended
For the year ended
31.03.2026
31.03.2025
Salary and Wages
593.48
494.03
Contribution to P.F. & Other Funds
131.11
95.06
Staff welfare Expenses
20.42
19.58
Total
745.01
608.67
13.3.1	
Including allowances, bonus, incentives, performance related pay, overtime pay, etc.	
13.3.2 	 Disclosures as per Ind AS 19 ‘Employee Benefits’ in respect of provision made towards various 
employee benefits except those covered under acturial valuation, are provided in Note 9.1 
13.3.3 	 Disclosures as per Ind AS 19 ‘Employee Benefits’ in respect of defined benefit plans and other 
long term employee benefit plans which are covered under acturial valuation are disclosed in Note 
9.1	
13.3.4 	 Expenses recognised is Rs. 42.44 cr for Provident Fund in the year ended 31.03.26, and Rs. 42.06 
cr for F.Y. ended 31.03.2025;	
	
	
13.3.5 	 Expenses recognised is Rs. 23.48 cr for Pension Fund in the year ended 31.03.26, and Rs. 23.14 
cr for F.Y. ended 31.03.2025;	
	
	
13.3.6 	 Expenses recognised is Rs. 11.24 cr for the CIL Executive Defined Contribution Pension Scheme 
(NPS) for the year ended 31.03.2026, and Rs. 10.89 cr for F.Y. ended 31.03.2025.	
13.3.7 	 Refer note no 8.4 for revision in executive pay upgradation.		
	
13.3.8 	 The Company has evaluated the impact of the Code on Wages, 2019 and related labour codes.
Based on the assessment, no material impact is expected on the financial statements.



	
279
Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE - 13.4 : FINANCE COSTS
(₹ in crore)
For the year ended
For the year ended
31.03.2026
31.03.2025
Unwinding of discounts
 0.08 
 0.09 
TOTAL 
 0.08 
 0.09 
NOTE - 13.5 : Depreciation/Amortization/Impairment 
(` in crore)
For the year ended
For the year ended
31.03.2026
31.03.2025
Depreciation/Amortization/Impairment
Property, Plant And Equipment (Note 3.1)
33.14
30.30
Intangible Assets (Note 3.4)
2.66
4.73
Less:
Depreciation on funded assets (Note 3.1)
1.04
1.55
TOTAL
 34.76
33.48


280
Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE - 13.8 : OTHER EXPENSES 
(₹ in crore)
 
For the year ended  
For the year ended 
 
31.03.2026
 
31.03.2025
 
 
 
 
Power Expenses
6.32
 
6.27
Repairs and Maintenance
 
 
 
- Building
19.23
 
21.28
- Plant and Equipment
17.18
 
15.10
- Others
4.89
 
4.33
Travelling expenses
43.80
 
29.18
Training Expenses
 1.98 
 
2.24 
Telephone &Internet
 6.69 
 
4.00 
Advertisement & Publicity
 8.15 
 
2.56 
Security Expenses
 24.03 
 
24.51 
Legal Expenses
 0.24 
 
0.21 
Consultancy Charges
 2.24 
 
2.07 
Exploration Expenses in CMPDI
 548.44 
 
432.23 
Loss on Sale/Discard/Surveyed of Assets
- 
 
0.06 
Auditor's Remuneration & Expenses
 
 
 
- For Audit Fees
 0.06 
 
0.06 
- For Taxation Matters
- 
 
0.01 
- For Other Services
 0.05 
 
0.04 
- For Reimbursement of Exps.
 0.40 
 
0.48 
Internal & Other Audit Expenses
 1.15 
 
0.95 
Rehabilitation Charges
 
 
 
Lease Rent & Hiring Charges
 27.06 
 
24.10 
Rates & Taxes
 4.41 
 
1.58 
Insurance
 0.43 
 
0.49 
Loss on Exchange Rate Variance
 0.01 
 
0.01 
R & D expenses
 1.01 
 
0.03 
Environmental & Tree Plantation Expenses
 2.42 
 
2.77



	
281
Corporate Social Responsibility expenses
 13.22 
 
9.79 
Other Social and Welfare Expenses
 2.79 
 
2.93 
Provisions
 10.40 
 
0.79 
Write off(Net of Write back of provisions recognized earlier)
 0.34 
 
12.29 
Miscellaneous expenses
 18.72 
 
22.16 
Total 
765.66 
 
 622.52 
 
 
 
 
13.8 Details of provision 
 
 
For loans to body corporate and employees (4.2)
- 
 - 
For trade receivables (4.3)
 10.40 
0.79 
For financial deposits and receivables (4.6)
- 
 - 
For coal and store inventories (5.1)
- 
 - 
For other non current deposits and advances (6.1)
- 
 - 
For other current deposits and advances (6.2)
- 
 - 
Total provision during the period
10.40 
 0.79 
Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE - 13.8 : OTHER EXPENSES - Contd.
(₹ in crore)
 
For the year ended  
For the year ended 
 
31.03.2026
 
31.03.2025


282
Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(₹ in crore)
Annexure to CSR Expenses
 
 For the year 
ended 31.03.2026 
 For the year 
ended 31.03.2025 
A. Activity wise break-up of CSR Expneses (including excess spent):
Eradicating hunger, poverty and malnutrition
8.82
 7.04 
Promoting 
education, 
including 
special 
education 
and 
employment enhancing vocation skills 
2.87
 1.80 
Gender equality and measures for reducing inequalities faced by 
socially and economically backward groups
0.00
- 
Environmental sustainability
0.84
 0.04 
Protection of national heritage, art and culture 
- 
 
Benefit of armed forces veterans, war widows and their dependents
- 
 
Training to promote rural sports, nationally recognised sports, 
paralympic sports and olympic sports
- 
 
Contribution to fund set up by the Central government for socio 
economic development 
- 
 
Contribution to incubators or research and development projects
- 
 
Contributions to Universities and Research Institutes
- 
 
Rural development projects
 0.07 
 
Slum area development
- 
 
Disaster management, including relief, rehabilitation and 
reconstruction activities
- 
 
Administrative expenses
 0.63 
 0.44 
Liability Write back
 
 
Total 
 13.23 
9.32 
B. CSR required to be spent and CSR Expenditure Break-up
(a) Amount Required to be spent during the year (2% of 
Average net profits of the company made during the three 
immediately preceding financial years under Section 135 of 
the Companies Act, 2013)
13.21 
 9.78 
(b)  Amount approved by the Board to be spent during the year 
18.00 
 15.72 
(c) Amount spent during the year on: 
 
 
(i) Construction/Acquisition of any asset 
- 
 
(ii) on purposes other than (i) above
13.23 
 9.32 
Total
 13.23 
9.32



	
283
C. Reconciliation of CSR Expenses recognised and CSR Expenses spent
2025-26
2024-25
CSR Expenses Spent
13.23 
9.32
Add: Utilised during the year
 2.30 
2.77
Less: Excess carried forward
 2.31 
2.30
Add: Unspent CSR expense on ongoing projects
- 
- 
Add: Unspent CSR expense on other than ongoing
- 
- 
Amount recognised in P&L
 13.22* 
9.79**
*13.22 crore includes Rs. 31,222 interest on fund given 
** 9.79 crore includes Rs. 56,500 interest on fund given
D. Unspent amount Other than ongoing Project [Section 135(5)]
2025-26
2024-25
Opening Balance
 - 
 - 
Deposited in specific fund of sch. VII within 6 months
 - 
 - 
Amount required to be spent during the year
 - 
 - 
Amount Spent During the year
 - 
 - 
E. Excess amount spent [Section 135(5)]
Yearwise Details
Opening Balance
Amount required to be 
spent during the year
Amount spent 
during the year
Closing Balance
2022-23
 - 
 7.30 
8.92 
1.62 
2023-24
 - 
 7.66 
8.81 
1.15 
2024-25
 2.77 
 9.79 
9.32 
2.30 
2025-26
 2.30 
 13.22 
 13.23 
2.31 
Refer footnote to Other Advances and Deposits under Other Current Assets
F. Unspent Ongoing Project [Section 135(6)] (year-wise) 
2025-26
2024-25
Opening balance
With Company
 - 
 - 
In Separate CSR Account
 - 
 - 
Amount required to be spent during the year
 
 - 
 - 
Amount spent during the year
from companies bank account
 - 
 - 
In Separate CSR Account
 - 
 - 
Closing balance
With Company
 - 
 - 
In Separate CSR Account
 - 
 - 
G. Provision for Liability of CSR Expenses 
2025-26
2024-25
Opening Balance
0.47
1.44
Addition during the period
3.86
0.47
Adjustment during the year
0.47
1.44
Closing Balance
3.86
0.47


284
Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE - 14.1 : Tax Expense
(₹ in crore)
For the year ended
For the year ended
31.03.2026
31.03.2025
Current Year
 217.91 
222.64
Earlier Years
 2.79 
 (3.13)
Total current tax
 220.70 
 219.51 
Deferred tax
 (10.24)
 (4.28)
Total
 210.46 
 215.23 
Reconciliation of tax Expenses and the accounting profit
For the year ended
31.03.2026
For the year ended
31.03.2025
Profit Before Tax
 823.64 
 882.14 
At incometax rate of 25.168%
 207.29 
 222.02 
Less: Tax on exempted Income
 23.93 
 20.55 
Add: Tax on non-deductible expenses
 24.31 
 16.89 
Adjustment for Tax under MAT provisions
-
 - 
Adjustment for earlier year tax
 2.79 
 (3.13)
Income Tax Expenses reported in statement of Profit and Loss
 210.46 
 215.23 
Effective income tax rate :
 25.55 
 24.40



	
285
Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE - 15.1 : Other Comprehensive Income
(₹ in crore)
For the year ended
For the year ended
31.03.2026
31.03.2025
(A)
(i) Items that will not be reclassified to profit or loss
4.17
(20.83)
Remeasurement of defined benefit plans
(ii) Income tax relating to items that will not be 
reclassified to profit or loss
Remeasureemnt of defined benefit plans
1.05
(5.24)
Total (A)
3.12
15.59
15.1. Represents figure in respect of Gratuity Rs. 3.51 cr (P.Y. Rs. -15.19 cr) and for post retirement medical benefits 
Rs. 0.66 cr (P.Y. Rs. -5.64 cr).


286
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE 1 :
A.	
CORPORATE INFORMATION
	
Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Limited (CMPDIL), being a government 
of India company, and limited by shares was incorporated under the Companies 
Act, 1956 to provide consultancy support in coal and mineral exploration including 
geological, geophysical, hydrological and environmental data generation to CIL 
and its Subsidiaries and to other outside companies. The shares of the Company 
are listed and traded on the National Stock Exchange of India Limited (NSE) and 
Bombay Stock Exchange India Limited (BSE) in India. CMPDIL is a schedule 'B' / 
Miniratna-Cat-I CPSE under the administrative control of Ministry of Coal. CMPDIL 
is an 85% subsidiary of Coal India Ltd. (CIL). Its Registered office is situated at 
Gondwana Place, Kanke Road, Ranchi - 834 031, Jharkhand, India. The authorized 
and paid up share capital of the Company is Rs. 150.00 crore and Rs. 142.80 crore 
respectively as on March 31, 2026.
	
The financial statements for the year ended March 31, 2026, were approved for 
issue by the Board of Directors of the company on April 21, 2026
​B.	
Statement of Compliance and Recent Accounting Pronouncement
i)	
Statement of Compliance
	
The financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the Indian 
Accounting Standards (hereinafter referred to as the “Ind AS”) as notified under 
the Companies (Indian Accounting Standards) Rules, 2015 (as amended) 
read with Section 133 of the Companies Act, 2013 (“the Act”). The Ind ASs 
issued, notified and made effective till the date of financial statements as 
approved have been considered for the purpose of preparation of the financial 
statements.
	
The accounting policies are applied consistently except where a newly issued 
accounting standard is initially adopted or a revision to an existing accounting 
standard requires a change in the accounting policy hitherto in use.
ii)	 Application of new and revised standards:
	
Ministry of Corporate Affairs (MCA) notifies new standards or amendments to 
the existing standards under Companies (Indian Accounting Standards) Rules, 
from time to time. MCA has not notified any new standards or amendments to 
the existing standards which are effective from 1st April 2026.



	
287
Note 2: Material Accounting Policy Information
2.1	
Basis of preparation of financial statements
	
The Financial Statements have been prepared under the historical cost convention 
on accrual basis except certain financial instruments that are measured in terms of 
relevant Ind AS at amortized costs or fair value at the end of each reporting period.
	
Historical cost convention is generally based on the fair value of the consideration 
given in exchange for goods and services.
	
Items included in the financial statements are measured using the currency of the 
primary economic environment in which the Company operates (the functional 
currency). The financial statements are presented in Indian Rupees (₹), which is 
the Company’s functional and presentation currency and all values are rounded off 
‘in crore’ up to two decimal points.
2.2.	
Current and non-current Classification
	
The Company presents Assets and Liabilities in the Balance Sheet based on 
current/ non-current classification.
	
An asset is treated as current when:
a)	 It expects to realize the asset, or intends to sell or consume it, in its normal 
operating cycle;
b)	 It holds the asset primarily for the purpose of trading;
c)	 It expects to realize the asset within twelve months after the reporting period; 
or
d)	 The asset is cash or cash equivalent (as defined in Ind AS 7) unless the asset 
is restricted from being exchanged or used to settle a liability for at least twelve 
months after the reporting period. 
	
All other assets are classified as non-current.
	
A liability is treated as current by the Company when:
a)	 It expects to settle the liability in its normal operating cycle;
b)	 It holds the liability primarily for the purpose of trading;
c)	 The liability is due to be settled within twelve months after the reporting period; 
or
d)	 It does not have the right at the end of the reporting period to defer settlement 
of the liability for at least twelve months after the reporting period.


288
	
All other liabilities are classified as non-current.
	
Having regard to the nature of the business being carried out by the Company, the 
Company has ascertained its operating cycle as twelve months for the purpose of 
current and non-current classification of assets and liabilities.
2.3.	
Revenue recognition
	
Revenue from contracts with customers
	
Revenue is principally derived from the sale of related ancillary services. Revenue 
from sales of services is recognized when control of the services has transferred, 
being when the services are delivered to the customer. Delivery occurs when the 
services have been delivered to the specific location as the case may be, and 
the risks of loss have been transferred in accordance with the sales contract. The 
amount of revenue recognized reflects the consideration to which the Company is 
or expects to be entitled in exchange for those services. Accumulated experience 
is used to estimate and provide for the variable consideration as per the sales 
contract and revenue is only recognized to the extent that it is highly probable that 
a significant reversal will not occur. The amount of consideration does not contain 
a significant financing component as payment terms are less than one year as per 
the sales contracts.
	
The company has a number of long-term contracts to provide services to customers 
in future periods. Generally, revenue is recognized on an invoice basis, as each 
service rendered is a separate performance obligation, and therefore the right to 
consideration from a customer corresponds directly with our performance completed 
to date.
	
Interest
	
Interest Income from a financial asset is recognized when it is probable that the 
economic benefits will flow to the company and the amount of income can be 
measured reliably. Interest income is accrued on a time basis, by reference to the 
principal outstanding and at the effective interest rate applicable, which is the rate 
that exactly discounts the estimated future cash receipts through the expected life 
of the financial asset to that asset's net carrying amount on initial recognition.
	
Other Claims
	
Revenue in respect of Other claims (including interest on delayed realization from 
customers) are recognized only when there is reasonable certainty as to the ultimate 
collection and the amount can be measured reliably.



	
289
2.4.	
Grants from Government
	
Government Grants are not recognized until there is reasonable assurance that 
the company will comply with the conditions attached to the grants and that there is 
reasonable certainty that grants will be received.
	
Government grants are recognized in Statement of Profit & Loss on a systematic 
basis over the periods in which the company recognizes the related expenses or 
costs against which the grants are intended to compensate.
	
Government Grants related to assets are presented in the balance sheet by setting 
up the grants as deferred income and are recognized in Statement of Profit and 
Loss on systematic basis over the useful life of asset.
	
Grants related to income (i.e. grant related to other than assets) are presented as 
part of statement of profit or loss under the general heading ‘Other Income’.
	
A government grant/assistance that becomes receivable as compensation for 
expenses or losses already incurred or for the purpose of giving immediate financial 
support to the company with no future related costs, is recognized in profit or loss 
of the period in which it becomes receivable.
	
The Government grants or grants in the nature of promoter’s contribution is 
recognized directly in “Capital Reserve” which forms part of the “Shareholders 
Fund”.
2.5.	
Leases
	
A contract is, or contains, a lease if the contract conveys the right to control the use 
of an identified asset for a period of time in exchange for consideration.
2.5.1.	
Company as a lessee
	
The Company assesses whether a contract contains a lease, at inception of a 
contract. A contract is, or contains, a lease if the contract conveys the right to control 
the use of an identified asset for a period of time in exchange for consideration. To 
assess whether a contract conveys the right to control the use of an identified asset, 
the Company assesses whether: (i) the contract involves the use of an identified 
asset (ii) the Company has substantially all the economic benefits from use of the 
asset through the period of the lease and (iii) the Company has the right to direct 
the use of the asset.
	
At the commencement date, a lessee shall recognize a right-of-use asset at cost 
and a lease liability at the present value of the lease payments that are not paid at


290
that date for all leases unless the lease term is 12 months or less or the underlying 
asset is of low value
	
Subsequently, right-of-use asset is measured using cost model whereas, the lease 
liability is measured by increasing the carrying amount to reflect interest on the 
lease liability, reducing the carrying amount to reflect the lease payments made and 
remeasuring the carrying amount to reflect any reassessment or lease modifications.
	
The lease liability is initially measured at amortized cost at the present value of the 
future lease payments. The lease payments are discounted using the interest rate 
implicit in the lease or, if not readily determinable, using the incremental borrowing 
rates of these leases. Lease liabilities are premeasured with a corresponding 
adjustment to the related right of use asset if the Company changes its assessment 
if whether it will exercise an extension or a termination option. Lease liability and 
ROU asset are separately presented in the Balance Sheet and lease payments are 
classified as financing cash flows. Lease liability obligations is presented separately 
under the head “Financial Liabilities”.
	
Finance charges are recognized in finance costs in the Statement of Profit and Loss, 
unless the costs are included in the carrying amount of another asset applying other 
applicable standards.
	
Right-of-use asset is depreciated over the useful life of the asset, if the lease 
transfers ownership of the asset to the lessee by the end of the lease term or if 
the cost of the right-to-use asset reflects that the lessee will exercise a purchase 
option. Otherwise, the lessee shall depreciate the right-to-use asset from the 
commencement date to the earlier of the end of the useful life of the right-of-use 
asset or the end of the lease term.
2.5.2. 	
Company as a lessor
	
Assets are given on lease either as finance lease or operating lease
	
Finance Lease: A lease is classified as Finance Lease if it transfers substantially 
all the risks and rewards incidental to ownership of an underlying asset. Initially, 
asset held under finance lease is recognized in Balance Sheet and presented as a 
receivable at an amount equal to the net investment in the lease. Finance income 
is recognized over the lease term, based on a pattern reflecting a constant periodic 
rate of return on Company’s net investment in the lease.
	
Operating Lease: A lease which is not classified as a finance lease is an operating 
lease. The Company recognizes lease payments in case of assets given on 
operating leases as income on a straight line basis.



	
291
2.6.	
Property, Plant and Equipment (PPE) and Depreciation
	
An item of PPE is recognized as an asset if it is probable that future economic 
benefits associated with the item will flow to the Company and the cost of the item 
can be measured reliably.
	
PPE are initially measured at cost of acquisition/construction including 
decommissioning or restoration cost wherever required. Cost of land includes 
expenditures which are directly attributable to the acquisition of the land like, 
rehabilitation expenses, resettlement cost and compensation in lieu of employment 
incurred for concerned displaced persons etc.
	
After recognition, an item of all other Property, Plant and Equipment are carried at 
its cost less any accumulated depreciation and any accumulated impairment losses 
under Cost Model. The cost of an item of property, plant and equipment comprises:
a)	 Its purchase price, including import duties and non-refundable purchase taxes, 
after deducting trade discounts and rebates.
b)	 Any costs directly attributable to bringing the asset to the location and condition 
necessary for it to be capable of operating in the manner intended by the 
management.
c)	 The initial estimate of the costs of dismantling and removing the item and 
restoring the site on which it is located, the obligation for which a company 
incurs either when the item is acquired or as a consequence of having used the 
item during a particular period for purposes other than to produce inventories 
during that period.
d)	 Interest on Borrowings utilized to finance the construction of qualifying assets 
are capitalized as part of cost of the asset until such time that the asset is 
ready for its intended use.
	
Each part of an item of Property, Plant and Equipment with a cost that is significant 
in relation to the total cost of the item is depreciated separately. However, significant 
part(s) of an item of PPE having same useful life and depreciation method are 
grouped together in determining the depreciation charge.
	
Costs of the day to-day servicing described as ‘repairs and maintenance’ are 
recognized in the statement of profit and loss in the period in which the same are 
incurred.
	
Subsequent cost of replacing parts which are significant in relation to the total cost 
of an item of Property, Plant and Equipment are recognized in the carrying amount 
of the item, if it is probable that future economic benefits associated with the item


292
will flow to the company; and the cost of the item can be measured reliably. The 
carrying amount of those parts that are replaced is derecognized in accordance 
with the derecognition policy mentioned below.
	
When major inspection is performed, its cost is recognized in the carrying amount 
of the item of Property, Plant and Equipment as a replacement if it is probable that 
future economic benefits associated with the item will flow to the company; and the 
cost of the item can be measured reliably. Any remaining carrying amount of the 
cost of the previous inspection (as distinct from physical parts) is derecognized.
	
An item of Property, Plant or Equipment is derecognized upon disposal or when no 
future economic benefits are expected from the continuing use of assets. Any gain 
or loss arising on such derecognition of an item of Property Plant and Equipment is 
recognized in Profit and Loss.
	
Depreciation on Property, Plant and Equipment, except freehold land, is provided 
as per cost model on straight line basis over the estimated useful lives of the asset 
as follows:
Assets
Useful Life
Other Land (incl. Leasehold 
Land)
Life of the project or lease term whichever is 
lower
Building (incl. Roads)
3-60 years
Telecommunication
3-9 years
Plant and Equipment
1-15 years
Computers and Laptops
3 years
Office equipment
3-5 years
Furniture and Fixtures
10 years
Vehicles
8-10 years
	
Based on technical evaluation, the management believes that the useful lives given 
above best represent the period over which the management expects to use the 
asset. Hence the useful lives of the assets may be different from the useful lives as 
prescribed under Part C of Schedule II of the Companies Act, 2013. The estimated 
useful life of the assets is reviewed at the end of each financial year.
	
The residual value of Property, plant and equipment is considered 5% of the original 
cost of the asset except for some items of assets such as mobile phones 1%, other 
land, site restoration asset, other mining infrastructure, surveyed off assets.



	
293
	
Depreciation on the assets added / disposed of during the year is provided on pro-
rata basis with reference to the month of addition / disposal.
	
Assets that are fully depreciated, and retired from active use are disclosed separately 
as surveyed off assets at its residual value under Property, Plant Equipment and 
are tested for impairment.
	
Transition to IndAS
	
The company elected to continue with the carrying value as per the cost model (for 
all of its Property, Plant and Equipment as recognized in the financial statements as 
at the date of transition to IndAS, measured as per the previous GAAP.
2.7. 	
Intangible Assets and Amortisation:
	
Intangible assets acquired separately are measured on initial recognition at cost. 
Cost includes any directly attributable expenses necessary to make the assets 
ready for its intended use. After initial recognition, Intangible assets are carried at 
cost less any accumulated amortization and accumulated impairment losses.
	
Subsequent expenditure is recognized as an increase in the carrying amount of 
the asset when it is probable that future economic benefits deriving from the cost 
incurred will flow to the Company and the cost of the item can be measured reliably.
	
An item of Intangible asset is derecognized upon disposal or when no future 
economic benefits are expected from its use or disposal. Gains or losses arising 
from the derecognition of an intangible asset are measured as the difference 
between the net disposal proceeds and the carrying amount of the asset and are 
recognized in the Statement of Profit and Loss when the asset is derecognized.
	
Internally generated intangibles, excluding capitalized development costs, are not 
capitalized. Instead, the related expenditure is recognized in the statement of profit 
or loss and other comprehensive income in the period in which the expenditure is 
incurred.
	
The useful lives of intangible assets are assessed as either finite or indefinite. 
Intangible assets with finite lives are amortized over their useful economic lives 
and assessed for impairment whenever there is an indication that the intangible 
asset may be impaired. The amortization period and the amortization method for 
an intangible asset with a finite useful life are reviewed at least at the end of each 
reporting period. Changes in the expected useful life or the expected pattern of 
consumption of future economic benefits embodied in the asset are considered 
to modify the amortization period or method, as appropriate, and are treated as


294
changes in accounting estimates. The amortization expense on Intangible assets 
with finite lives is recognized in the statement of profit or loss. Amortization of 
Intangible asset is provided on straight line basis over the estimated useful lives of 
the Intangible asset as follows:
Intangible Assets
Useful Life
SAP/ERP
6 years
Other Computer Software
License period
	
An Intangible asset with an indefinite useful life is not amortized but is tested for 
Impairment at each reporting date.
	
Expenditure on research is charged to expenditure as and when incurred. 
Expenditure on development is capitalized only if the expenditure can be measured 
reliably, the product or process is technically and commercially feasible, future 
economic benefits are probable and the Company intends to and has sufficient 
resources to complete development and to use or sell the asset.
2.8 	
Impairment of Assets (other than Financial Assets)
	
The Company assesses at the end of each reporting period whether there is any 
indication that an asset may be impaired. If any such indication exists, the Company 
estimates the recoverable amount of the asset. An asset’s recoverable amount is 
the higher of the asset’s or cash-generating unit’s value in use and its fair value less 
costs of disposal, and is determined for an individual asset, unless the asset does 
not generate cash inflows that are largely independent of those from other assets 
or Companies of assets, in which case the recoverable amount is determined for 
the cash-generating unit to which the asset belongs. Company considers individual 
mines as separate cash generating units for the purpose of a test of impairment.
	
If the recoverable amount of an asset is estimated to be less than its carrying 
amount, the carrying amount of the asset is reduced to its recoverable amount and 
the impairment loss is recognized in the Statement of Profit and Loss.
2.9 	
Financial Instruments
	
A financial instrument is any contract that gives rise to a financial asset of one entity 
and a financial liability or equity instrument of another entity.
2.9.1 	
Financial Assets
2.9.1.1	
Initial recognition and measurement
	
All financial assets are recognized initially at fair value, in the case of financial



	
295
assets not recorded at fair value through profit or loss, plus transaction costs that 
are attributable to the acquisition of the financial asset. Purchases or sales of 
financial assets that require delivery of assets within a time frame established by 
regulation or convention in the market place (regular way trades) are recognized 
on the trade date, i.e., the date that the Company commits to purchase or sell 
the asset. However, trade receivables that do not contain a significant financing 
component are measured at transaction price.
2.9.1.2	
Subsequent measurement
	
For purposes of subsequent measurement, financial assets are classified in four 
categories:
•	
Debt instruments at amortized cost
•	
Debt instruments at fair value through other comprehensive income (FVTOCI)
•	
Debt instruments, derivatives and equity instruments at fair value through 
profit or loss (FVTPL)
•	
Equity instruments measured at fair value through other comprehensive 
income (FVTOCI)
2.9.1.2.1	 Debt instruments at amortised cost 
	
A ‘debt instrument’ is measured at the amortised cost if both the following conditions 
are met: 
a) 	 The asset is held within a business model whose objective is to hold assets 
for collecting contractual cash flows, and 
b) 	 Contractual terms of the asset give rise on specified dates to cash flows that 
are solely payments of principal and interest (SPPI) on the principal amount 
outstanding. 
	
After initial measurement, such financial assets are subsequently measured at 
amortised cost using the effective interest rate (EIR) method. Amortised cost is 
calculated by taking into account any discount or premium on acquisition and fees or 
costs that are an integral part of the EIR. The EIR amortisation is included in finance 
income in the profit or loss. The losses arising from impairment are recognised in 
the profit or loss. 
2.9.1.2.2	 Debt instrument at FVTOCI 
	
A ‘debt instrument’ is classified as at the FVTOCI if both of the following criteria are 
met: 
a) 	 The objective of the business model is achieved both by collecting contractual


296
cash flows and selling the financial assets, and 
b) 	 The asset’s contractual cash flows represent SPPI.
 	
Debt instruments included within the FVTOCI category are measured initially as 
well as at each reporting date at fair value. Fair value movements are recognized in 
the other comprehensive income (OCI). However, the Company recognizes interest 
income, impairment losses & reversals and foreign exchange gain or loss in the 
P&L. On derecognition of the asset, cumulative gain or loss previously recognised 
in OCI is reclassified from the equity to P&L. Interest earned whilst holding FVTOCI 
debt instrument is reported as interest income using the EIR method.
2.9.1.2.3	 Debt instrument at FVTPL 
	
FVTPL is a residual category for debt instruments. Any debt instrument, which 
does not meet the criteria for categorization as at amortized cost or as FVTOCI, is 
classified as at FVTPL. 
	
In addition, the Company may elect to designate a debt instrument, which otherwise 
meets amortized cost or FVTOCI criteria, as at FVTPL. However, such election 
is allowed only if doing so reduces or eliminates a measurement or recognition 
inconsistency (referred to as ‘accounting mismatch’). The Company has not 
designated any debt instrument as at FVTPL. 
	
Debt instruments included within the FVTPL category are measured at fair value 
with all changes recognized in the P&L.
2.9.1.3 	 Derecognition
	
A financial asset (or, where applicable, a part of a financial asset or part of a group 
of similar financial assets) is primarily derecognised (i.e. removed from the balance 
sheet) when: 
• 
The rights to receive cash flows from the asset have expired, or 
• 
The Company has transferred its rights to receive cash flows from the asset 
or has assumed an obligation to pay the received cash flows in full without 
material delay to a third party under a ‘pass-through’ arrangement; and either 
(a) the Company has transferred substantially all the risks and rewards of the 
asset, or (b) the Company has neither transferred nor retained substantially all 
the risks and rewards of the asset, but has transferred control of the asset.
	
When the Company has transferred its rights to receive cash flows from an asset 
or has entered into a pass-through arrangement, it evaluates if and to what extent 
it has retained the risks and rewards of ownership. When it has neither transferred



	
297
nor retained substantially all of the risks and rewards of the asset, nor transferred 
control of the asset, the Company continues to recognise the transferred asset to 
the extent of the Company’s continuing involvement. In that case, the Company 
also recognises an associated liability. The transferred asset and the associated 
liability are measured on a basis that reflects the rights and obligations that the 
Company has retained. Continuing involvement that takes the form of a guarantee 
over the transferred asset is measured at the lower of the original carrying amount 
of the asset and the maximum amount of consideration that the Company could be 
required to repay. 
2.9.1.4	
Impairment of financial assets (other than fair value)
	
In accordance with Ind AS 109, the Company applies expected credit loss (ECL) 
model for measurement and recognition of impairment loss on the following Financial 
assets and credit risk exposure:
a)	 Financial assets that are debt instruments, and are measured at amortized 
cost e.g., loans, debt securities, deposits, trade receivables and bank balance
b)	 Financial assets that are debt instruments and are measured as at FVTOCI
c)	 Lease receivables under Ind AS 116
d)	 Trade receivables or any contractual right to receive cash or another financial 
asset that result from transactions that are within the scope of Ind AS 115
	
The Company follows ‘simplified approach’ for recognition of impairment loss 
allowance on:
•	
Trade receivables or contract revenue receivables; and
•	
All lease receivables resulting from transactions within the scope of Ind AS 
116
	
The application of simplified approach does not require the Company to track 
changes in credit risk. Rather, it recognizes impairment loss allowance based on 
lifetime ECLs at each reporting date, right from its initial recognition.
2.9.2 	
Financial liabilities
2.9.2.1	
Initial recognition and measurement
	
The Company financial liabilities include trade and other payables, loans and 
borrowings including bank overdrafts. All financial liabilities are recognized initially 
at fair value and, in the case of loans and borrowings and payables, net of directly


298
attributable transaction costs.
2.9.2.2	
Subsequent measurement
	
The measurement of financial liabilities depends on their classification, as described 
below:
2.9.2.2.1	 Financial Liabilities at Fair Value through Profit or Loss
	
Financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss include financial liabilities held 
for trading and financial liabilities designated upon initial recognition as at fair value 
through profit or loss. Financial liabilities are classified as held for trading if they 
are incurred for the purpose of repurchasing in the near term. This category also 
includes derivative financial instruments entered into by the Company that are not 
designated as hedging instruments in hedge relationships as defined by Ind AS 
109. Separated embedded derivatives are also classified as held for trading unless 
they are designated as effective hedging instruments.
	
Gains or losses on liabilities held for trading are recognized in the profit or loss.
2.9.2.2.2	 Financial Liabilities at Amortized Cost
	
After initial recognition, these are subsequently measured at amortized cost using 
the effective interest rate method. Gains and losses are recognized in profit or 
loss when the liabilities are derecognized as well as through the effective interest 
rate amortization process. Amortized cost is calculated by taking into account any 
discount or premium on acquisition and fees or costs that are an integral part of the 
effective interest rate. The effective interest rate amortization is included as finance 
costs in the statement of profit and loss.
2.9.2.3	
Derecognition
	
A financial liability is derecognized when the obligation under the liability is discharged 
or cancelled or expires. When an existing financial liability is replaced by another 
from the same lender on substantially different terms, or the terms of an existing 
liability are substantially modified, such an exchange or modification is treated as 
the Derecognition of the original liability and the recognition of a new liability. The 
difference between the carrying amount of a financial liability (or part of a financial 
liability) extinguished or transferred to another party and the consideration paid, 
including any non-cash assets transferred or liabilities assumed, shall be recognized 
in profit or loss.



	
299
2.9.2.4	
Reclassification of Financial Assets
	
The Company determines classification of financial assets and liabilities on initial 
recognition. After initial recognition, no reclassification is made for financial assets 
which are equity instruments and financial liabilities. For financial assets which are 
debt instruments, a reclassification is made only if there is a change in the business 
model for managing those assets. Changes to the business model are expected 
to be infrequent. The Company senior management determines change in the 
business model as a result of external or internal changes which are significant to 
the Company operations. Such changes are evident to external parties. A change in 
the business model occurs when the Company either begins or ceases to perform 
an activity that is significant to its operations. If the Company reclassifies financial 
assets, it applies the reclassification prospectively from the reclassification date 
which is the first day of the immediately next reporting period following the change 
in business model. The Company does not restate any previously recognized gains, 
losses (including impairment gains or losses) or interest.
	
The following table shows various reclassification and how they are accounted for
Original 
classification
Revised 
classification
Accounting treatment
Amortized 
cost
FVTPL
Fair value is measured at reclassification date. 
Difference between previous amortized cost and fair 
value is recognized in P&L.
FVTPL
Amortized 
Cost
Fair value at reclassification date becomes its new 
gross carrying amount. EIR is calculated based on 
the new gross carrying amount.
Amortized 
cost
FVTOCI
Fair value is measured at reclassification date. 
Difference between previous amortized cost and fair 
value is recognized in OCI. No change in EIR due to 
reclassification.
FVTOCI
Amortized 
cost
Fair value at reclassification date becomes its 
new amortized cost carrying amount. However, 
cumulative gain or loss in OCI is adjusted against fair 
value. Consequently, the asset is measured as if it 
had always been measured at amortized cost.
FVTPL
FVTOCI
Fair value at reclassification date becomes its new 
carrying amount. No other adjustment is required.
FVTOCI
FVTPL
Assets continue to be measured at fair value. 
Cumulative gain or loss previously recognized in OCI 
is reclassified to P&L at the reclassification date.


300
2.9.2.5 	 Offsetting of Financial Instruments
	
Financial assets and financial liabilities are offset and the net amount is reported 
in the Balance Sheet if there is a currently enforceable legal right to offset the 
recognized amounts and there is an intention to settle on a net basis, to realize the 
assets and settle the liabilities simultaneously.
2.9.2.6 	 Fair Value measurement of Financial Instruments
	
Fair value is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a 
liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement 
date under current market conditions.
	
The Company categorizes assets and liabilities measured at fair value into one 
of three levels depending on the ability to observe inputs employed for such 
measurement:
a)	 Level 1: Inputs are quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets for identical 
assets or liabilities.
b)	 Level 2: Inputs other than quoted prices included within level 1 that are 
observable either directly or indirectly for the asset or liability.
c)	 Level 3: Inputs for the asset or liability which are not based on observable 
market data (unobservable inputs).
	
The Company has an established control framework with respect to the measurement 
of fair values. This includes a finance team that has overall responsibility for 
overseeing all significant fair value measurements who regularly review significant 
unobservable inputs, valuation adjustments and fair value hierarchy under which 
the valuation should be classified.
2.9.3. 	
Cash and Cash Equivalents
	
Cash and Cash equivalent in the Balance Sheet comprise cash at banks and in 
hand and short-term deposits with an original maturity of three months or less, 
which are subject to an insignificant risk of changes in value. For the purpose of 
the statement of cash flows, cash and cash equivalents consist of cash and short-
term deposits, as defined above, net of outstanding bank overdrafts as they are 
considered an integral part of the company’s cash management.
2.10. 	
Taxation
	
Income Tax expense represents the sum of the tax currently payable and deferred 
tax.



	
301
	
Current tax is the amount of income taxes payable (recoverable) in respect of the 
taxable profit (tax loss) for a period. Taxable profit differs from “profit before income 
tax” as reported in the statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income 
because it excludes items of income or expense that are taxable or deductible 
in other years and it further excludes items that are never taxable or deductible. 
The company’s liability for current tax is calculated using tax rates that have been 
enacted or substantively enacted by the end of the reporting period.
	
Deferred tax liabilities are generally recognized for all taxable temporary differences. 
Deferred tax assets are generally recognized for all deductible temporary difference 
to the extent that it is probable that taxable profits will be available against which 
those deductible temporary differences can be utilized. Such assets and liabilities 
are not recognized if the temporary difference arises from goodwill or from the initial 
recognition (other than in a business combination) of other assets and liabilities in 
a transaction that affects neither the taxable profit nor the accounting profit.
	
Deferred tax liabilities are recognized for taxable temporary differences associated 
with investments in subsidiaries and associates, except where the company is able to 
control the reversal of the temporary difference and it is probable that the temporary 
difference will not reverse in the foreseeable future. Deferred tax assets arising from 
deductible temporary differences associated with such investments and interests are 
only recognized to the extent that it is probable that there will be sufficient taxable 
profits against which to utilize the benefits of the temporary differences.
	
The carrying amount of deferred tax assets is reviewed at the end of each reporting 
period and reduced to the extent that it is no longer probable that sufficient taxable 
profits will be available to allow all or part of the asset to be recovered. Unrecognized 
deferred tax assets are reassessed at the end of each reporting year and are 
recognized to the extent that it has become probable that sufficient taxable profit 
will be available to allow all or part of the deferred tax asset to be recovered.
	
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured at the tax rates that are expected 
to apply in the period in which the liability is settled or the asset is realized, based 
on tax rate (and tax laws) that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the 
end of the reporting period.
	
The measurement of deferred tax liabilities and assets reflects the tax consequences 
that would follow from the manner in which the company expects, at the end of 
the reporting period, to recover or settle the carrying amount of its assets and 
liabilities.


302
	
Current and deferred tax are recognized in profit or loss, except when they relate 
to items that are recognized in other comprehensive income or directly in equity, in 
which case, the current and deferred tax are also recognized in other comprehensive 
income or directly in equity respectively. Where current tax or deferred tax arises 
from the initial accounting for a business combination, the tax effect is included in 
the accounting for the business combination.
	
Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are offset when there is a legally enforceable 
right to offset current tax assets against current tax liabilities, and when the deferred 
income tax assets and liabilities relate to income taxes levied by the same taxation 
authority on either the taxable entity or different taxable entities where there is an 
intention to settle the balances on a net basis.
2.11. 	
Employee Benefits
2.11.1. 	 Short Term Benefits
	
Short-term employee benefits are employee benefits (other than termination 
benefits) that are expected to be settled wholly before twelve months after the end 
of the annual reporting period in which the employees render the related service.
	
All short term employee benefits are recognized in the period in which the services 
are rendered by employees
2.11.2. 	 Post-Employment Benefits and Other Long Term Employee benefits
2.11.2.1.	Defined Contribution Plans
	
A defined contribution plan is a post-employment benefit plan under which the 
company pays fixed contribution into fund maintained by a separate body and 
the company will have no legal or constructive obligation to pay further amounts. 
Obligations for contributions to defined contribution plans are recognized as an 
employee benefit expense in the statement of profit and loss in the periods during 
which services are rendered by employees.
2.11.2.2. 	Defined Benefit Plans
	
A defined benefit plan is a post-employment benefit plan other than a defined 
contribution plan. The company’s net obligation in respect of defined benefit plans 
is calculated by estimating the amount of future benefit that employees have earned 
in return of their service in the current and prior periods. The benefit is discounted 
to determine its present value and reduced by the fair value of plan assets, if any.



	
303
The discount rate is based on the prevailing market yields of Indian Government 
securities as at the reporting date that have maturity dates approximating the terms 
of the company’s obligations and that are denominated in the same currency in 
which the benefits are expected to be paid.
	
The application of actuarial valuation involves making assumptions about the 
discount rate, expected rates of return on assets, future salary increases, mortality 
rates etc. Due to the long term nature of these plans, such estimates are subject 
to uncertainties. The calculation is performed at each balance sheet by an actuary 
using the projected unit credit method. When the calculation results in the benefit to 
the company, the recognized asset is limited to the present value of the economic 
benefits available in the form of any future refunds from the plan or reduction in 
future contributions to the plan. An economic benefit is available to the company if 
it is realizable during the life of the plan, or on settlement of plan liabilities.
	
Re-measurement of the net defined benefit liability, which comprises actuarial gain 
and losses considering the return on plan assets (excluding interest) and the effects 
of the assets ceiling (if any, excluding interest) are recognized immediately in the 
other comprehensive income. The company determines the net interest expense 
(income) on the net defined benefit liability (asset) for the period by applying the 
discount rate used to measure the defined benefit obligation at the beginning of 
the annual period to the net defined benefit liability (asset), taking into account 
any changes in the net defined benefit liability (asset) during the period as a result 
of contributions and benefit payments. Net interest expense and other expenses 
related to defined benefit plans are recognized in profit and loss.
	
When the benefits of the plan are improved, the portion of the increased benefit 
relating to past service by employees is recognized as an expense immediately in 
the statement of profit and loss.
2.11.3. 	 Other Long Term Employee benefits
	
Other long-term employee benefits are all employee benefits other than short-term 
employee benefits, post- employment benefits and termination benefits.
	
Other long-term employee benefits include items which are not expected to be 
settled wholly before twelve months after the end of the annual reporting period in 
which the employees render the related service.
	
For other long-term employee benefits, net total of the following amounts is 
recognized in the statement of profit or loss:


304
i).	 Service cost
ii).	 Net interest on the net defined benefit liability (asset)
iii).	Re-measurements of the net defined benefit liability (asset)
2.12 	
Foreign Currency
	
Transactions in foreign currencies are initially recognised using the exchange rate 
prevailing at the transaction date. Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in 
foreign currencies outstanding at the end of the reporting period are translated at the 
exchange rates prevailing as at the end of reporting period. Exchange differences 
arising on the settlement of monetary assets and liabilities or on translating 
monetary assets and liabilities at rates different from those at which they were 
translated on initial recognition during the period or in previous financial statements 
are recognised in statement of profit and loss in the period in which they arise.
	
Non-monetary items denominated in foreign currency are valued at the exchange 
rates prevailing on the date of transactions.
2.13 	
Inventories
2.13.1. 	 Stores, Spares and Other Inventories
	
The Stock of stores and spares including other inventories are valued at cost 
calculated on the basis of the weighted average method.
	
Provisions are made at the rate of 100% for unserviceable, damaged and obsolete 
stores and spares and at the rate of 50% for stores & spares not moved for 5 years.
2.14. 	
Provisions, Contingent Liabilities and Contingent Assets
	
Provisions are recognized when the company has a present obligation (legal 
or constructive) as a result of a past event, and it is probable that an outflow of 
economic benefits will be required to settle the obligation and a reliable estimate 
of the amount of the obligation can be made. Where the time value of money is 
material, provisions are stated at the present value of the expenditure expected to 
settle the obligation.
	
All provisions are reviewed at each Balance Sheet date and adjusted to reflect the 
current best estimate.
	
Where it is not probable that an outflow of economic benefits will be required, or 
the amount cannot be estimated reliably, the obligation is disclosed as a contingent



	
305
liability, unless the probability of outflow of economic benefits is remote. Possible 
obligations, whose existence will only be confirmed by the occurrence or non-
occurrence of one or more future uncertain events not wholly within the control of 
the company, are also disclosed as contingent liabilities unless the probability of 
outflow of economic benefits is remote.
	
Contingent assets are possible assets that arise from past events and whose 
existence will be confirmed only by the occurrence or non-occurrence of one or more 
uncertain future events not wholly within the control of the Company. Contingent 
assets are disclosed in the financial statements when inflow of economic benefits 
is probable on the basis of the judgment of management. These are assessed 
continually to ensure that developments are appropriately reflected in the financial 
statements.
2.15. 	
Earnings Per Share
	
Basic earnings per share are calculated by dividing profit or loss attributable to 
ordinary equity holders of the company (the numerator) by the weighted average 
number of ordinary shares outstanding (the denominator) during the period. Diluted 
earnings per shares is calculated by dividing adjusted profit or loss attributable to 
ordinary equity holders of the company (the numerator) by the weighted average 
number of ordinary shares considered for deriving basic earnings per shares and 
also the weighted average number of ordinary shares that could have been issued 
upon conversion of all dilutive potential ordinary shares (the denominator).
2.16 	
Judgements, Estimates and Assumptions
	
The preparation of the financial statements in conformity with Ind AS requires 
management to make estimates, judgements and assumptions that affect the 
application of accounting policies and the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, 
the disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of financial statements 
and the amount of revenue and expenses during the reported period. Application 
of accounting policies involving complex and subjective judgements and the use 
of assumptions in these financial statements have been disclosed. Accounting 
estimates could change from period to period. Actual results could differ from those 
estimates. Estimates and underlying assumptions are reviewed on an ongoing 
basis. Revisions to accounting estimate are recognized in the period in which the 
estimates are revised and, if material, their effects are disclosed in the notes to the 
financial statements.
2.16.1 	
Judgements


306
	
In the process of applying the Company accounting policies, management has made 
the following judgements, which have the most significant effect on the amounts 
recognized in the financial statements:
2.16.1.1	 Formulation of Accounting Policies
	
Accounting policies are formulated in a manner that results in financial statements 
containing relevant and reliable information about the transactions, other events 
and conditions to which they apply. Those policies need not be applied when the 
effect of applying them is immaterial.
	
In the absence of an Ind AS that specifically applies to a transaction, other event 
or condition, management has used its judgement in developing and applying an 
accounting policy that results in information that is:
a)	 relevant to the economic decision-making needs of users and
b)	 reliable in that financial statements and:
(i)	
represent faithfully the financial position, financial performance and cash 
flows of the company; 
(ii)	 reflect the economic substance of transactions, other events and 
conditions, and not merely the legal form; 
(iii) 	 are neutral, i.e. free from bias; 
(iv)	 are prudent; and 
(v)	 are complete in all material respects on a consistent basis
	
In making the judgement management refers to, and considers the applicability of, 
the following sources in descending order
a)	 The requirements in Ind AS dealing with similar and related issues; and
b)	 The definitions, recognition criteria and measurement concepts for assets, 
liabilities, income and expenses in the Framework.
	
In making the judgement, management considers the most recent pronouncements 
of the International Accounting Standards Board and in the absence thereof those 
of the other standard-setting bodies that use a similar conceptual framework to 
develop accounting standards, other accounting literature and accepted industry 
practices, to the extent that these do not conflict with the Indian Accounting Standard 
and accounting policies and practices as stated in above paragraph.
	
The Company operates in the mining sector (a sector where the exploration, evaluation,



	
307
and development production phases are based on the varied topographical and 
geo-mining terrain spread over the lease period running over decades and prone 
to constant changes), the accounting policies whereof have evolved based on 
specific industry practices supported by research committees and approved by the 
various regulators owing to its consistent application over the last several decades. 
In the absence of specific accounting literature, guidance and standards in certain 
specific areas which are in the process of evolution. The Company continues to 
strive to develop accounting policies in line with the development of accounting 
literature and any development therein shall be accounted for prospectively as per 
the procedure laid down above more particularly in Ind AS 8.
2.16.1.2 	Materiality
	
Ind AS applies to items which are material. Management uses judgement in deciding 
whether individual items or group of item are material in the financial statements. 
Materiality is judged by reference to the nature or magnitude or both of the items. 
The deciding factor is whether omitting or misstating or obscuring an information 
could individually or in combination with other information influence decisions that 
primary users make on the basis of the financial statements. Management also uses 
judgement of materiality for determining the compliance requirement of the Ind AS. 
Further, the Company may also be required to present separately immaterial items 
when required by law.
	
With effect from 01.04.2019 Errors/omissions discovered in the current year relating 
to prior periods are treated as immaterial and adjusted during the current year, if all 
such errors and omissions in aggregate does not exceed 1% of total revenue from 
Operation (net of statutory levies) as per the last audited financial statement of the 
company.
2.16.2 	
Estimates and Assumptions
	
The key assumptions concerning the future and other key sources of estimation 
uncertainty at the reporting date, that have a significant risk of causing a material 
adjustment to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities within the next financial 
year, are described below. The Company based its assumptions and estimates 
on parameters available when the financial statements were prepared. Existing 
circumstances and assumptions about future developments, however, may change 
due to market changes or circumstances arising that are beyond the control of the 
Company. Such changes are reflected in the assumptions when they occur.


308
	
The estimates, judgements and associated assumptions are based on historical 
experience and other factors that are considered to be relevant. Actual results may 
differ from these estimates.
	
Estimates and underlying assumptions are reviewed on an ongoing basis. Revisions 
to accounting estimates are recognized in the period in which the estimate is revised 
and future periods affected.
	
The application of accounting policies that require critical judgements and accounting 
estimates involving complex and subjective judgements and the use of assumptions 
in these financial statements have been disclosed here in below:
2.16.2.1	 Impairment of Non-Financial Assets
	
There is an indication of impairment if, the carrying value of an asset or cash 
generating unit exceeds its recoverable amount, which is the higher of its fair value 
less costs of disposal and its value in use. Company considers individual mines 
as separate cash generating units for the purpose of test of impairment. The value 
in use calculation is based on a DCF model. The cash flows are derived from the 
budget for the next five years and do not include restructuring activities that the 
Company is not yet committed to or significant future investments that will enhance 
the asset’s performance of the CGU being tested. The recoverable amount is 
sensitive to the discount rate used for the DCF model as well as the expected future 
cash-inflows and the growth rate used for extrapolation purposes. These estimates 
are most relevant to other mining infrastructures. The key assumptions used to 
determine the recoverable amount for the different CGUs, are disclosed and further 
explained in respective notes.
2.16.2.2 	 Income Taxes
	
Deferred Tax Assets are recognized for unused tax losses to the extent that it 
is probable that taxable profit will be available against which the losses can be 
utilized. Significant management judgement is required to determine the amount of 
deferred tax assets that can be recognized, based upon the likely timing and the 
level of future taxable profits together with future tax planning strategies.
2.16.2.3	 Defined benefit plans and long term employee benefits 
	
The cost of the defined benefit plan and other post-employment medical benefits 
and the present value of the obligations are determined using actuarial valuations. 
An actuarial valuation involves making various assumptions that may differ from



	
309
actual developments in the future. These include the determination of the discount 
rate, future salary increases and mortality rates.
	
Due to the complexities involved in the valuation and its long-term nature, a 
defined benefit obligation is highly sensitive to changes in these assumptions. All 
assumptions are reviewed at each reporting date. The parameter most subject to 
change is the discount rate. In determining the appropriate discount rate for plans 
operated in India, the management considers the interest rates of government 
bonds in currencies consistent with the currencies of the post-employment benefit 
obligation.
	
The mortality rate is based on publicly available mortality tables of the country. 
Those mortality tables tend to change only at interval in response to demographic 
changes.
2.16.2.4	 Intangible asset under development
	
The Company capitalizes intangible asset under development for a project in 
accordance with the accounting policy. Initial capitalization of costs is based on 
management’s judgement that technological and economic feasibility is confirmed, 
usually when a project report is formulated and approved.


310
NOTE – 16 : ADDITIONAL NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL INFORMATION:
1.	
FAIR VALUE MEASUREMENT
(a)	 Financial Instruments by Category
(₹ in crore)
Financial assets and liabilities measured 
at amortized cost for which fair values are 
disclosed.
31st March 2026
31st March 2025
FVTPL
Amortized 
cost
FVTPL
Amortized 
cost
Financial Assets at FVTPL
Investments :
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Preference Shares
- Equity Component
- Debt Component
- Other Investments
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Loans
Nil
1.56
Nil
0.58
Deposits & receivable
Nil
137.97
Nil
179.22
Trade receivables
Nil
1,074.74
Nil
943.68
Cash & cash equivalents
Nil
459.10
Nil
279.27
Other Bank Balances
Nil
970.90
Nil
800.90
Financial Liabilities
Lease Liabilities
Nil
1.45
Nil
1.15
Trade payables
Nil
276.45
Nil
200.12
Security Deposit and Earnest money
Nil
96.49
Nil
97.75
Other Liabilities
Nil
227.88
Nil
76.24
(b)	 Fair value hierarchy
	
Table below shows judgements and estimates made in determining the fair values 
of the financial instruments that are (a) recognised and measured at fair value 
and (b) measured at amortised cost and for which fair values are disclosed in the 
financial statements. To provide an indication about the reliability of the inputs 
used in determining fair value, the company has classified its financial instruments 
into the three levels prescribed under the accounting standard.



	
311
(₹ in crore)
Financial assets and liabilities measured at fair value
31st March 2026
31st March 2025
Level 2
Level 3
Level 2
Level 3
Financial Assets at FVTPL
Investments :
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Mutual Fund/ICD
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Financial Liabilities
If any item
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
(₹ in crore)
Financial assets and liabilities measured at amortized cost 
for which fair values are disclosed.
31st March 2026
31st March 2025
Level 2
Level 3
Level 2
Level 3
Financial Assets at FVTPL
Investments :
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Preference Shares
 - Equity Component
 - Debt Component
 - Other Investments
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Loans
Nil
1.56
Nil
0.58
Deposits & receivable
Nil
137.97
Nil
179.22
Trade receivables
Nil
1,074.74
Nil
943.68
Cash & cash equivalents
Nil
459.10
Nil
279.27
Other Bank Balances
Nil
970.90
Nil
800.90
Financial Liabilities
Leased Liabilities
Nil
1.45
Nil
1.15
Trade payables
Nil
276.45
Nil
200.12
Security Deposit and Earnest money
Nil
96.49
Nil
97.75
Other Liabilities
Nil
227.88
Nil
76.24
A brief of each level is given below:
Level 1: 	Level 1 hierarchy includes financial instruments measured using quoted prices.
Level 2: 	The fair value of financial instruments that are not traded in an active market is 
determined using valuation techniques which maximize the use of observable 
market data and rely as little as possible on entity-specific estimates. If all 
significant inputs required to fair value an instrument are observable, the 
instrument is included in level 2. This includes Mutual fund which is valued 
using closing Net Asset Value (NAV) as at the reporting date.


312
Level 3: 	If one or more of the significant inputs is not based on observable market data, 
the instrument is included in level 3. This is the case for investments, security 
deposits and other liabilities included in level 3.
(C)	 Valuation technique used in determining fair value
	
Valuation techniques used to value financial instruments include:
	
The use of quoted market prices (NAV) of instruments in respect of investment in 
Mutual Funds.
(d)	
Fair value measurements using significant unobservable inputs
	
At present there are no fair value measurements using significant unobservable 
inputs.
(e) 	 Fair values of financial assets and liabilities measured at amortized cost
 The carrying amounts of trade receivables, short term deposits, cash and 
cash equivalents, trade payables are considered to be the same as their fair 
values, due to their short-term nature.
 The Company considers that the Security Deposits does not include a 
significant financing component. The security deposits coincide with the 
company’s performance and the contract requires amounts to be retained 
for reasons other than the provision of finance. The withholding of a 
specified percentage of each milestone payment is intended to protect the 
interest of the company, from the contractor failing to adequately complete 
its obligations under the contract. Accordingly, transaction cost of Security 
deposit is considered as fair value at initial recognition and subsequently 
measured at amortized cost.
	
Significant estimates: The fair value of financial instruments that are not traded in an 
active market is determined using valuation techniques. The Company uses its judgment 
to select a method and makes suitable assumptions at the end of each reporting period.
2.	
FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT
	
Financial risk management objectives and policies:
	
The Company principal financial liabilities, comprise trade and other payables. The main 
purpose of these financial liabilities is to finance the Company operations and to provide 
guarantees to support its operations. The Company principal financial assets include 
loans, trade and other receivables, and cash and cash equivalents that is derived directly 
from its operations.



	
313
	
The Company is exposed to market risk, credit risk and liquidity risk. The Company 
senior management oversees the management of these risks. The Company senior 
management is supported by a risk committee that advises, inter alia, on financial risks 
and the appropriate financial risk governance framework for the Company. The risk 
committee provides assurance to the Board of Directors that the Company financial risk 
activities are governed by appropriate policies and procedures and that financial risks 
are identified, measured and managed in accordance with the Company policies and 
risk objectives. The Board of Directors reviews and agrees policies for managing each 
of these risks, which are summarized below.
	
This note explains the sources of risk which the entity is exposed to and how the entity 
manages the risk and the impact of hedge accounting in the financial statements.
Risk
Exposure arising from
Measurement
Management
Credit Risk
Trade receivables and 
financial asset 
Ageing 
analysis/Credit 
Analysis
Department of public enterprises 
(DPE guidelines), diversification 
of bank deposits credit limits and 
other 
securities; 
Counterparty 
default risk of trade receivables is 
managed by financial assurances 
like Security Deposits, Advances, 
Bank Guarantee etc.
Liquidity 
Risk
Borrowings and other 
liabilities
Periodic cash 
flows
Availability of committed credit 
lines and borrowing facilities
Market 
Risk- 
foreign 
exchange
Future commercial 
transactions, recognized 
financial assets 
and liabilities not 
denominated in INR 
Cash flow 
forecast 
sensitivity 
analysis
Regular watch and review by senior 
management and audit committee.
Market 
Risk- 
interest rate
Cash and Cash 
equivalents, Bank 
deposits and mutual 
funds
Cash flow 
forecast 
sensitivity 
analysis
Department of public enterprises 
(DPE guidelines), Regular watch 
and review by senior management 
and audit committee.
	
The Company risk management is carried out by the board of directors as per DPE 
guidelines issued by Government of India. The board provides written principals for 
overall risk management as well as policies covering investment of excess liquidity.
A.	
Credit Risk: Credit risk arises when a counterparty defaults on contractual 
obligations resulting in financial loss to the Company. Counterparty defaults risk 
of trade receivables is managed by financial assurances like Security Deposits, 
Advances, Bank Guarantee etc.


314
B.	
Provision for Expected credit loss: Company provides for expected credit 
risk loss for doubtful/ credit impaired assets, by lifetime expected credit losses 
(Simplified approach). Refer Note – 4.3, Trade Receivables.
	
Significant estimates and judgments Impairment of financial assets
	
The impairment provisions for financial assets disclosed above are based on 
assumptions about risk of default and expected loss rates. The Company uses 
judgement in making these assumptions and selecting the inputs to the impairment 
calculation, based on the Company past history, existing market conditions as well 
as forward looking estimates at the end of each reporting period.
C.	
Liquidity Risk
	
Prudent liquidity risk management implies maintaining sufficient cash and 
marketable securities and the availability of funding through an adequate amount 
of committed credit facilities to meet obligations when due. Due to the dynamic 
nature of the underlying businesses, Company treasury maintains flexibility in 
funding by maintaining availability under committed credit lines. 
	
Management monitors forecasts of the company's liquidity position (comprising 
the undrawn borrowing facilities) and cash and cash equivalents on the basis of 
expected cash flows. 
	
The bank borrowings of Coal India Ltd. has been secured by creating charge 
against stock of coal, stores and spare parts and book debts of CIL and its 
Subsidiary Companies within consortium of banks. The total working capital credit 
limit available to CIL is ₹430.00 crore, of which fund based limit is ₹140.00 crore 
and non-fund based limit is ₹290.00 crore. Refer i - Other Significant Matters for 
details of the arrangement.
D.	
Market risk
(a)	 Foreign currency risk
	
Foreign currency risk arises from future commercial transactions and 
recognized assets or liabilities denominated in a currency that is not the 
Company’s functional currency (INR). The Company is exposed to foreign 
exchange risk arising from foreign currency transactions. Foreign exchange 
risk in respect of foreign operation is considered to be insignificant. The 
Company also imports and risk is managed by regular follow up. Company 
has a policy which is implemented when foreign currency risk becomes 
significant.



	
315
(b)	 Cash flow and fair value interest rate risk.
	
The Company main interest rate risk arises from bank deposits with change 
in interest rate exposes the Company to cash flow interest rate risk. Company 
policy is to maintain most of its deposits at fixed rate. Company manages 
the risk using guidelines from Department of public enterprises (DPE), 
diversification of bank deposits credit limits and other securities.
Capital management
The company being a government entity manages its capital as per the guidelines 
of Department of investment and public asset management under ministry of finance.
Capital Structure of the company is as follows:

(₹ in crore)
31.03.2026
31.03.2025
Equity Share capital
142.80
142.80
Long term debt
NIL
NIL
3.	
Employee Benefits: Recognition and Measurement (Ind AS – 19)
Defined Benefit Plans:
a)	
Gratuity
	
The Company provides for gratuity, a post-employment defined benefit plan ("the 
Gratuity Scheme") covering the eligible employees. Gratuity payment is made as 
per policy of the company subject to maximum of ₹ 25 lacs (₹20 lacs prior to 
01.10.2025) in case of executives and ₹20 lacs in case of non-executive at the 
time of separation from the company considering the provisions of the Payment 
of Gratuity Act 1972 as amended. The liability or asset recognised in the balance 
sheet in respect of the Gratuity Scheme is the present value of the defined benefit 
obligation at the end of the reporting year less the fair value of plan assets. The 
defined benefit obligation is calculated at each reporting date by actuaries using 
the projected unit credit method. Re-measurement gains and losses arising from 
experience adjustments and changes in actuarial assumptions are recognised in 
the year in which they occur, directly in other comprehensive income (OCI).
	
The Gratuity Scheme is funded through trust maintained with Life Insurance 
Corporation of India. LIC also provides an insurance coverage (Life Cover Sum 
Assured- “LCSA”) in case of death of a member during service, to compensate 
the shortfall in gratuity amount from estimated payable at normal retirement date 
based on last drawn salary subject to ceiling of maximum limit


316
b)	
Post-Retirement Medical Benefit – Executive (CPRMSE)
	
Company has post-retirement medical benefit scheme known as Contributory Post 
Retirement Medicare Scheme for Executive of CIL and its Subsidiaries (CPRMSE), 
to provide Medicare to the executives, their spouses and fully financially dependent 
Divvying child(ren) suffering from not less than 40% of any disability in Company 
hospital/empaneled hospitals or outpatient/Domiciliary only in India subject to ceiling 
limit, on account of retirement on attaining the age of superannuation or are separated 
by the Company on medical ground or retirement under Voluntary Retirement 
Scheme under common coal cadre or Voluntary Retirement Scheme formulated and 
made applicable from time to time. Membership is not extended to the executives 
who resigns from the services of the CIL and its subsidiaries. The maximum amount 
reimbursable during the entire life for the retired executives, spouse and dependent 
Divvying child (ren) taken together jointly or severally is Rs. 25 lakhs except for 
specified diseases with no upper limit. The Scheme is funded through trust for group, 
maintained with Life Insurance Corporation of India. The liability for the scheme is 
recognized based on actuarial valuation done at each reporting date.
c)	
Post-Retirement Medical Benefit – Non Executive (CPRMS -NE)
	
As a part of social security scheme under wage agreement, Company is providing 
Contributory Post-Retirement Medicare Scheme for non-executives (CPRMSE-
NE) to provide medical care to the non- executives and their spouses and Divyang 
Child(ren) in Company hospital/empaneled hospitals or outpatient/Domiciliary only 
in India subject to ceiling limit, on account of retirement on attaining the age of 
superannuation or are separated by the Company on medical ground or retirement 
under Voluntary Retirement Scheme formulated and made applicable from time to 
time or resigns from the company at the age of 57 Years or above or on death to 
the spouse and Divyang Child(ren). The maximum amount reimbursable during 
the entire life for the retired non-executives and spouse taken together jointly 
or severally is Rs. 8 lakhs except for specified diseases with no upper limit. The 
maximum amount reimbursable during the entire life of Divyang child would be 
₹ 2.5 lakh. The Scheme is funded through trust for group, maintained with Life 
Insurance Corporation of India. The liability for the scheme is recognized based on 
actuarial valuation done at each reporting date.
Defined Contribution Plans:
a)	
Provident Fund and Pension
	
Company pays fixed contribution towards Provident Fund and Pension Fund at 
pre-determined rates based on a fixed percentage of the eligible employee's salary 
i.e. 12% and 7% of Basic salary and Dearness Allowance towards Provident Fund



	
317
and Pension Fund respectively. These funds are governed by a separate statutory 
body under the control of Ministry of Coal, Government of India, named Coal Mines 
Provident Fund Organization (CMPFO). The contribution towards the fund for the 
period is recognized in the Statement of Profit & Loss.
b)	
CIL Executive Defined Contribution Pension Scheme (NPS)
	
The company provides a post-employment contributory pension scheme to the 
executives of the Company known as “CIL Executive Defined Contribution Pension 
Scheme -2007” (NPS). The Scheme is funded through trust for group, maintained 
with Life Insurance Corporation of India. The obligation of the Company is to 
contribute to the trust to the extent of amount not exceeding 30% of basic pay and 
dearness allowance less employer’s contribution towards provident fund, gratuity, 
post-retirement medical benefits-Executive i.e. CPRMSE or any other retirement 
benefits. The current employer contribution of 6.99% of basic and Dearness 
Allowance is being charged to statement of profit and loss. 
Other Long Term Employee Benefits 
a)	
Leave Encashment
	
The company provides benefit of total Earned Leave (EL) of 30 days and Half 
Paid Leave (HPL) of 20 days to the executives of the company, accrued and 
credited proportionately on half yearly basis on the first day of January and July of 
every year. During the service, 75% EL credited balance is one time encashable 
in each calendar year subject to ceiling of maximum 60 days EL encashment. 
Accumulated HPL is not permitted for encashment during the period of service. On 
superannuation, EL and HPL together is considered for encashment subject to the 
overall limit of 300 days without commutation of HPL. In case of non-executives, 
leave encashment is governed by the National Coal Wage Agreement (NCWA) 
and at present the workmen are entitled to get encashment of earned leave at the 
rate of 15 days per year and on discontinuation of service due to death, retirement, 
superannuation and VRS, the balance leave or 150 days whichever is less, is 
allowed for encashment. Therefore, the liabilities for earned leave are expected 
to be settled during the service as well as after the retirement of employee. They 
are therefore measured as the present value of expected future payments to be 
made in respect of services provided by employees up to the end of the reporting 
period using the projected unit credit method. The benefits are discounted using 
the market yields at the end of the reporting period that have terms approximating 
to the terms of the related obligation. The scheme is funded by qualifying insurance 
policies from Life Insurance Corporation of India. The liability under the scheme is 
borne by the Company as per actuarial valuation at each reporting date.


318
b)	
Life Cover Scheme (LCS)
	
As a part of the social security scheme, the Group has a Life Cover Scheme known 
as “Life Cover Scheme of Coal India Limited” (LCS) which covers all the executive 
and non-executive cadre employees. In case of death in service, an amount of 
₹1,25,000 (executive) and ₹1,56,250 (non-executive w.e.f 01.06.2023) is paid to 
the nominees under the scheme. The expected cost of the benefits is recognized 
when an event occurs that causes the benefit payable under the scheme.
c)	
Settlement Allowances
	
As part of the wage agreement, a lump sum amount is payable as a settling-
in allowance to all non-executive employees covered under NCWA upon their 
superannuation on or after 31.10.2010. The Board of Directors of Coal India 
Limited in its 481st meeting held on 31st July 2025 approved the enhanced amount 
of ₹20,000 from the existing ₹12,000. The liability under this scheme is borne by 
the Company based on actuarial valuation at each reporting date.
d)	
Group Personal Accident Insurance (GPAIS)
	
Coal India Limited (CIL) has taken group insurance scheme from United India 
Insurance Company Limited to cover the executives of the CIL Group against 
personal accident known as “Coal India Executives Group Personal Accident 
Insurance Scheme” (GPAIS). GPAIS covers all types of accident on 24-hour basis 
worldwide. Premium for the scheme is borne by the CIL.
e)	
Travel Allowance Scheme
	
As a part of wage agreement, Non-executive employees are entitled to travel 
assistance for visiting their home town and for “Bharat Bhraman” once in a block 
of 4 years. A lump sum amount of Rs.10000 and Rs. 15000 is paid for visiting 
Home town and “Bharat Bhraman”, respectively. The liability for the scheme is 
recognized based on actuarial valuation at each reporting date
	
Funding status of defined benefit plans and other long term employee benefits 
plans are as under:
(i) Funded
(ii) Unfunded
 Gratuity
 Life Cover Scheme
 Leave Encashment
 Settlement Allowance
 Post-Retirement Medical Benefit – 
Executive (CPRMSE)
 Group Personal Accident Insurance
 Post-Retirement Medical Benefit – 
Non Executive (CPRMS -NE)
 Leave Travel Concession



	
319
Total liability based on valuation made by the Actuary, details of which are mentioned 
below.

(₹ in crore)
Head
Opening 
Actuarial 
Liability 
as on 
01.04.2024
Incremental 
Liability 
during the 
year
Opening 
Actuarial 
Liability 
as on 
31.03.2025
Incremental 
Liability 
during the 
year
Closing 
Actuarial 
Liability 
as on 
31.03.2026
Gratuity
161.50
4.56
166.06
5.57
171.63
Leave Executive
94.78
-0.76
94.02
19.86
113.88
Leave Non-Executive
29.40
3.15
32.55
-0.84
31.71
Settlement Allowance 
Executives
3.94
0.07
4.01
-0.12
3.89
Settlement Allowance 
Non-executives
0.42
-0.01
0.41
0.20
0.61
Leave Travel Concession
2.45
1.2
3.65
-1.61
2.04
Medical Benefits 
Executives
66.52
1.90
68.42
-0.29
68.13
Medical Benefits  
Non-Executives
27.44
3.32
30.76
-0.69
30.07
Total 
386.45
13.43
399.88
22.08
421.96
(iii) Disclosure as per Actuary’s Certificate
ACTUARIAL VALUATION OF GRATUITY LIABILITY AS AT 31.03.2026 CERTIFICATES 
AS PER IND AS 19 (2015)

(₹ in crore)
31.03.2025
A. Profit & Loss (P&L)
31.03.2026
4.95
Current service cost
5.11
0.00
Past service cost - plan amendments
12.53
0.00
Curtailment cost / (credit)
0.00
0.00
Settlement cost / (credit)
0.00
4.95
Service cost
17.64
-0.55
Net interest on net defined benefit liability / (asset)
-0.36
0.00
Immediate recognition of (gains)/losses – other long term 
employee benefit plans
0.00
4.40
Cost recognized in P&L
17.28


320

(₹ In crore)
31.03.2025
B: Other Comprehensive Income (OCI)
31.03.2026
7.61
Actuarial (gain)/loss due to DBO experience
4.24
7.38
Actuarial (gain)/loss due to DBO assumption changes
-6.33
14.98
Actuarial (gain)/loss arising during period
-2.09
0.20
Return on plan assets (greater)/less than discount rate
-1.42
15.18
Actuarial (gains)/ losses recognized in OCI
-3.51

(₹ In crore)
31.03.2025
C: Defined Benefit Cost
31.03.2026
4.95
Service cost
17.64
-0.55
Net interest on net defined benefit liability / (asset)
-0.36
15.18
Actuarial (gains)/ losses recognized in OCI
-3.51
0.00
Immediate recognition of (gains)/losses – other long term em-
ployee benefit plans
0.00
19.59
Defined Benefit Cost
13.77

(₹ In crore)
31.03.2024
D: Assumptions as at
31.03.2025
7.00%
Discount Rate
6.60%
Executive: 9%
Non-Executive: 6.25%
Rate of salary increase
Executive: 9%
Non-Executive: 6.25%
Table 2:

(₹ in crore)
31.03.2025
A: Development of Net Balance Sheet Position
31.03.2026
-166.06
Defined benefit obligation (DBO)
-171.63
156.53
Fair value of plan assets (FVA)
178.33
-9.53
Funded status [surplus/(deficit)]
6.71
0.00
Effect of Asset ceiling
0.00
-9.53
Net defined benefit asset/ (liability)
6.71



	
321

(₹ in crore)
31.03.2025
B: Reconciliation of Net Balance Sheet Position
31.03.2026
5.68
Net defined benefit asset/ (liability) at end of prior period
-9.53
-4.95
Service cost
-17.64
0.55
Net interest on net defined benefit liability/ (asset)
0.36
-15.18
Amount recognized in OCI
3.51
4.37
Employer contributions
30.00
0.00
Benefit paid directly by the Company
0.00
0.00
Acquisitions credit/ (cost)
0.00
0.00
Divestitures
0.00
0.00
Cost of termination benefits
0.00
-9.53
Net defined benefit asset/ (liability) at end of current period
6.71
31.03.2025
C: Assumptions as at:
31.03.2026
6.60%
Discount Rate
6.90%
Executive: 9%
Non-Executive: 6.25%
Rate of salary increase
Executive: 9% 
Non-Executive: 6.25%
Table 3:

(₹ in crore)
31.03.2025
A: Change in Defined Benefit Obligation (DBO)
31.03.2026
161.50
DBO at end of prior period
166.06
4.95
Current service cost
5.11
10.40
Interest cost on the DBO
10.29
0.00
Curtailment (credit)/ cost
0.00
0.00
Settlement (credit)/ cost
0.00
0.00
Past service cost - plan amendments
12.53
0.00
Acquisitions (credit)/ cost
0.00
7.61
Actuarial (gain)/loss - experience
4.24
0.00
Actuarial (gain)/loss - demographic assumptions
0.00
7.38
Actuarial (gain)/loss - financial assumptions
-6.33
0.00
Benefits paid directly by the Company
0.00
-25.78
Benefits paid from plan assets
-20.27
166.06
DBO at end of period
171.63


322

(₹ in crore)
31.03.2025
B: Change in Fair Value of Assets
31.03.2026
167.18
Fair value of assets at end of prior period
156.53
0.00
Acquisition adjustment
0.00
10.95
Interest income on plan assets
10.65
4.37
Employer contributions
30.00
-0.20
Return on plan assets greater/ (lesser) than discount rate
1.42
-25.78
Benefits paid
-20.27
156.53
Fair Value of assets at the end of current period
178.33
Table 4: Additional Disclosure Information

(₹ in crore)
A. Expected benefit payments for the year ending
March 31, 2027
12.85
March 31, 2028
11.44
March 31, 2029
11.02
March 31, 2030
7.06
March 31, 2031
7.17
March 31, 2032 to March 31, 2036
37.99
Beyond 10 years
390.96
B. Expected employer contributions for the period ending 31 March 2027
4.29
C. Weighted average duration of defined benefit obligation
13 Years
D. Accrued Benefit Obligation at 31 March 2026
112.37
E. Plan Asset Information as at 31 March 2026
Government of India Securities (Central and State)
0.00%
High quality corporate bonds (including Public Sector Bonds)
0.00%
Equity shares of listed companies
0.00%
Property
0.00%
Cash (including Special Deposits)
0.00%
Schemes of insurance - conventional products
100.00%
Schemes of insurance - ULIP products
0.00%
Other
0.00%
Total
100.00%
F. Current and Non-Current Liability Breakup as at 31 March 2026
Current Liability
12.43
Non-Current Liability
159.20
Liability as at 31 March 2026
171.63



	
323
Description of Plan Characteristics and Associated Risks:
The Gratuity scheme is a final salary Defined Benefit Plan that provides for a lump sum 
payment made on exit either by way of retirement, death, disability or voluntary withdrawal. 
The benefits are defined on the basis of final salary and the period of service and paid as 
lump sum at exit. The Plan design means the risks commonly affecting the liabilities and the 
financial results are expected to be:
1. 	
Interest rate risk: The defined benefit obligation calculated uses a discount rate based 
on government bonds. If bond yields fall, the defined benefit obligation will tend to 
increase
2. 	
Salary Inflation risk: Higher than expected increases in salary will increase the defined 
benefit obligation
3. 	
Demographic risk: This is the risk of variability of results due to unsystematic nature 
of decrements that include mortality, withdrawal, disability and retirement. The effect of 
these decrements on the defined benefit obligation is not straight forward and depends 
upon the combination of salary increase, discount rate and vesting criteria. It is important 
not to overstate withdrawals because in the financial analysis the retirement benefit of 
a short career employee typically costs less per year as compared to a long service 
employee.
Description of Funding Arrangements and Policies:
There are no Statutory minimum funding requirements for such plans mandated in India. 
However a company can fund the benefits by way of a separate irrevocable Trust to take 
advantage of tax exemptions and also to ensure security of benefits.
The scheme is funded by way of a separate irrevocable Trust and the company is expected 
to make regular contributions to the Trust. The fund is managed by an insurance company 
and the assets are invested in their conventional group gratuity product. The fund provides 
a capital guarantee of the balance accumulated and declares interest periodically that is 
credited to the fund account. Although we know that the fund manager invests the funds as 
per products approved by IRDA and investment guidelines as stipulated under section 101 of 
IT Act, the exact asset mix is unknown and not publicly available.
The Trust assets managed by the fund manager are highly liquid in nature and we do not 
expect any significant liquidity risks.
The Trustees are responsible for the investment of the assets of the Trust as well as the day 
to day administration of the scheme. Administrative expenses of the trust are met by the 
company. The Trustees are required to conduct necessary business e.g. Approval of Trust's 
Financial Statements, Review Investment performance.


324
Table 5: Sensitivity Analysis
Disclosure Item	

(₹ In crore)
DBO on base assumptions as at 31st March 2026
171.63
Discount Rate
 Discount Rate as at 31st March 2026
6.90%
Effect on DBO due to 0.5% increase in discount rate
-9.77
Percentage Impact
-6%
Effect on DBO due to 0.5% decrease in discount rate
10.76
Percentage Impact
6%
Salary Escalation Rate
Salary Escalation Rate as at 31st March 2026
Executives: 9%;
Non Executives: 6.25%
Effect on DBO due to 0.5% increase in salary escalation rate
2.98
Percentage Impact
2%
Effect on DBO due to 0.5% decrease in salary escalation rate
-3.50
Percentage Impact
-2%
ACTUARIAL VALUATION OF LEAVE BENEFIT SCHEME AS AT 31.03.2026 CERTIFICATES 
AS PER IND AS 19 (2015)
Table 1:

(₹ in crore)
31.03.2025
A. Profit & Loss (P&L)
31.03.2026
19.38
Current service cost
23.21
0.00
Past service cost - plan amendments
0.00
0.00
Curtailment cost / (credit)
0.00
0.00
Settlement cost / (credit)
0.00
19.38
Service cost
23.21
-0.10
Net interest on net defined benefit liability / (asset)
-0.63
-3.40
Immediate recognition of (gains)/losses–other long term employee benefit plans
8.28
15.87
Cost recognized in P&L
30.87



	
325

(₹ in crore)
31.03.2025
B: Other Comprehensive Income (OCI)
31.03.2026
-11.78
Actuarial (gain)/loss due to DBO experience
16.55
6.78
Actuarial (gain)/loss due to DBO assumption changes
-6.80
-5.01
Actuarial (gain)/loss arising during period
9.75
1.60
Return on plan assets (greater)/less than discount rate
-1.47
0.00
Actuarial (gains)/ losses recognized in OCI
0.00

(₹ in crore)
31.03.2025
C: Defined Benefit Cost
31.03.2026
19.38
Service cost
23.21
-0.10
Net interest on net defined benefit liability / (asset)
-0.63
0.00
Actuarial (gains)/ losses recognized in OCI
0.00
-3.40
Immediate recognition of (gains)/losses – other long term 
employee benefit plans
8.28
15.87
Defined Benefit Cost
30.87
31.03.2024
D: Assumptions as at:
31.03.2025
7.00%
Discount Rate
6.60%
Executive: 9%
Non-Executive: 6.25%
Rate of salary increase
Executive: 9%
Non-Executive: 6.25%
Table 2:

(₹ in crore)
31.03.2025
A: Development of Net Balance Sheet Position
31.03.2026
-126.56
Defined benefit obligation (DBO)
-145.59
124.92
Fair value of plan assets (FVA)
135.31
-1.64
Funded status [surplus/(deficit)]
-10.28
0.00
Effect of Asset ceiling
0.00
-1.64
Net defined benefit asset/ (liability)
-10.28


326

(₹ in crore)
31.03.2025
B: Reconciliation of Net Balance Sheet Position
31.03.2026
-11.26
 Net defined benefit asset/ (liability) at end of prior period
-1.64
-19.38
Service cost
-23.21
0.10
Net interest on net defined benefit liability/ (asset)
0.63
3.40
Actuarial (losses)/ gains
-8.28
25.49
Employer contributions
22.23
0.00
Benefit paid directly by the Company
0.00
0.00
Acquisitions credit/ (cost)
0.00
0.00
Divestitures
0.00
0.00
Cost of termination benefits
0.00
-1.64
Net defined benefit asset/ (liability) at end of current period
-10.28
31.03.2025
C: Assumptions as at:
31.03.2026
6.60%
Discount Rate
6.90%
Executive: 9%
Non-Executive: 6.25%
Rate of salary increase
Executive: 9%
Non-Executive: 6.25%
Table 3:

(₹ in crore)
31.03.2025
A: Change in Defined Benefit Obligation (DBO)
31.03.2026
124.18
DBO at end of prior period
126.56
19.38
Current service cost
23.21
7.99
Interest cost on the DBO
7.64
0.00
Curtailment (credit)/ cost
0.00
0.00
Settlement (credit)/ cost
0.00
0.00
Past service cost - plan amendments
0.00
0.00
Acquisitions (credit)/ cost
0.00
-11.78
Actuarial (gain)/loss - experience
16.55
0.00
Actuarial (gain)/loss - demographic assumptions
0.00
6.78
Actuarial (gain)/loss - financial assumptions
-6.80
0.00
Benefits paid directly by the Company
0.00
-19.98
Benefits paid from plan assets
-21.58
126.56
DBO at end of period
145.59



	
327

 (₹ in crore)
31.03.2025
B: Change in Fair Value of Assets
31.03.2026
112.92
Fair value of assets at end of prior period
124.92
0.00
Acquisition adjustment
0.00
8.10
Interest income on plan assets
8.27
25.49
Employer contributions
22.23
-1.60
Return on plan assets greater/(lesser) than discount rate
1.47
-19.98
Benefits paid
-21.58
124.92
Fair Value of assets at the end of current period
135.31
Table 4: Additional Disclosure Information

(₹ in crore)
A. Expected benefit payments for the year ending
March 31, 2027
6.20
March 31, 2028
8.02
March 31, 2029
6.51
March 31, 2030
5.00
March 31, 2031
6.33
March 31, 2032 to March 31, 2036
23.81
Beyond 10 years
449.91
B. Expected employer contributions for the period ending 31 March 2027
25.09
C. Weighted average duration of defined benefit obligation
16 Years
D. Accrued Benefit Obligation at 31 March 2026
53.29
E. Plan Asset Information as at 31 March 2026
Government of India Securities (Central and State)
0.00%
High quality corporate bonds (including Public Sector Bonds)
0.00%
Equity shares of listed companies
0.00%
Property
0.00%
Cash (including Special Deposits)
0.00%
Schemes of insurance - conventional products
100.00%
Schemes of insurance - ULIP products
0.00%
Other
0.00%
Total
100.00%
F. Current and Non-Current Liability Breakup as at 31 March 2026
Current Liability
6.00
Non-Current Liability
139.59
Liability as at 31 March 2026
145.59


328
Description of Plan Characteristics and Associated Risks:
Description of Plan Characteristics and Associated Risks:
The Leave scheme is a final salary Defined Benefit Plan that provides for a lump sum 
payment made on exit either by way of retirement, death, disability or voluntary withdrawal. 
The benefits are defined on the basis of final salary and the accumulated leave balances and 
paid as lump sum at exit. The Plan design means the risks commonly affecting the liabilities 
and the financial results are expected to be: 
1 	 Interest rate risk: The defined benefit obligation calculated uses a discount rate based on 
government bonds. If bond yields fall, the defined. benefit obligation will tend to increase
2 	 Salary Inflation risk: Higher than expected increases in salary will increase the defined 
benefit obligation
3 	 Demographic risk: This is the risk of variability of results due to unsystematic nature 
of decrements that include mortality, withdrawal, disability and retirement. The effect of 
these decrements on the defined benefit obligation is not straight forward and depends 
upon the combination of salary increase, discount rate and vesting criteria. It is important 
not to overstate withdrawals because in the financial analysis the retirement benefit of 
a short career employee typically costs less per year as compared to a long service 
employee.
4 	 Change in Leave Balances: This is the risk of variability of results due to a significant 
variation from expected accumulation of leave balances. All other aspects remaining 
same, higher than expected increase in the leave balances will increase the defined 
benefit obligation.
Description of Funding Arrangements and Policies:
There are no Statutory minimum funding requirements for such plans mandated in India. 
However a company can fund the benefits by way of a separate irrevocable Trust or Qualifying 
Insurance Plan (QIP) to ensure security of benefits.
The scheme is funded by way of a qualifying insurance plan and the company is expected to 
make regular contributions to the plan. The plan is managed by an insurance company and 
the assets are invested in their conventional product. The plan provides a capital guarantee 
of the balance accumulated and declares interest periodically that is credited to the plan 
account. Although we know that the fund manager invests the funds contributed under the 
plan as per products approved by IRDA and investment guidelines as stipulated under section 
101 of IT Act, the exact asset mix is unknown and not publicly available.
The plan assets managed by the fund manager are highly liquid in nature and we do not 
expect any significant liquidity risks.



	
329
Employees of Master Policyholders are considered member for receipt of benefits of the plan. 
Insurance Company reimburse the master policyholder, the appropriate benefit in respect of 
the members on proof to the complete satisfaction of it of the benefit having become payable 
or paid.
Table 5: Sensitivity Analysis
Disclosure Item
(₹ in crore)
DBO on base assumptions as at 31st March 2026
145.59
                                      Discount Rate
 Discount Rate as at 31st March 2026
6.90%
Effect on DBO due to 0.5% increase in discount rate
-10.43
Percentage Impact
-7%
Effect on DBO due to 0.5% decrease in discount rate
11.58
Percentage Impact
8%
Salary Escalation Rate
Salary Escalation Rate as at 31st March 2026
Executive: 9%
Non-Executive: 6.25%
Effect on DBO due to 0.5% increase in salary escalation rate
11.36
Percentage Impact
8%
Effect on DBO due to 0.5% decrease in salary escalation rate
-10.34
Percentage Impact
-7%
ACTUARIAL VALUATION OF POST RETIREMENT MEDICAL BENEFITS AS AT 
31.03.2026 CERTIFICATES AS PER IND AS 19 (2015)
Table 1:

(₹ in crore)
31.03.2025
A: Profit & Loss (P&L)
31.03.2026
1.64
Current service cost
1.55
0.00
Past service cost - plan amendments
0.00
0.00
Curtailment cost / (credit)
0.00
0.00
Settlement cost / (credit)
0.00


330
1.64
Service cost
1.55
0.05
Net interest on net defined benefit liability / (asset)
-0.22
0.00
Immediate recognition of (gains)/losses–other long term employee benefit plans
0.00
1.69
Cost recognized in P&L
1.33

(₹ in crore)
31.03.2025
B: Other Comprehensive Income (OCI)
31.03.2026
1.67
Actuarial (gain)/loss due to DBO experience
3.70
4.06
Actuarial (gain)/loss due to DBO assumption changes
-3.10
5.72
Actuarial (gain)/loss arising during period
0.59
-0.08
Return on plan assets (greater)/less than discount rate
-1.25
5.64
Actuarial (gains)/ losses recognized in OCI
-0.66

(₹ in crore)
31.03.2025
C: Defined Benefit Cost
31.03.2026
1.64
Service cost
1.55
0.05
Net interest on net defined benefit liability / (asset)
-0.22
5.64
Actuarial (gains)/ losses recognized in OCI
-0.66
0.00
Immediate recognition of (gains)/ losses – other long term  
employee benefit plans
0.00
7.33
Defined Benefit Cost
0.68
31.03.2024
D: Assumptions as at:
31.03.2025
7.00%
Discount Rate
6.60%
0.00%
Medical Inflation Rate
0.00%
Table 2:

(₹ in crore)
31.03.2025
A: Development of Net Balance Sheet Position
31.03.2026
-99.18
Defined benefit obligation (DBO)
-98.20
100.73
Fair value of plan assets (FVA)
102.50
1.55
Funded status [surplus/(deficit)]
4.30
0.00
Effect of Asset ceiling
0.00
1.55
Net defined benefit asset/ (liability)
4.30



	
331

(₹ in crore)
31.03.2025
B: Reconciliation of Net Balance Sheet Position
31.03.2026
-10.33
Net defined benefit asset/ (liability) at end of prior period
1.55
-1.64
Service cost
-1.55
-0.05
Net interest on net defined benefit liability/ (asset)
0.22
-5.64
Amount recognized in OCI
0.66
19.21
Employer contributions
3.43
0.00
Benefit paid directly by the Company
0.00
0.00
Acquisitions credit/ (cost)
0.00
0.00
Divestitures
0.00
0.00
Cost of termination benefits
0.00
1.55
Net defined benefit asset/ (liability) at end of current period
4.30
31.03.2025
C: Assumptions as at:
31.03.2026
6.60%
Discount Rate
6.90%
0.00%
Medical Inflation Rate
0.00%
Table 3:

(₹ in crore)
31.03.2025
A: Change in Defined Benefit Obligation (DBO)
31.03.2026
93.96
DBO at end of prior period
99.18
1.64
Current service cost
1.55
6.28
Interest cost on the DBO
6.24
0.00
Curtailment (credit)/ cost
0.00
0.00
Settlement (credit)/ cost
0.00
0.00
Past service cost - plan amendments
0.00
0.00
Acquisitions (credit)/ cost
0.00
1.67
Actuarial (gain)/loss - experience
3.70
0.00
Actuarial (gain)/loss - demographic assumptions
0.00
4.06
Actuarial (gain)/loss - financial assumptions
-3.10
0.00
Benefits paid directly by the Company
0.00
-8.42
Benefits paid from plan assets
-9.36
99.18
DBO at end of period
98.20


332

(₹ in crore)
31.03.2025
B: Change in Fair Value of Assets
31.03.2026
83.63
Fair value of assets at end of prior period
100.73
0.00
Acquisition adjustment
0.00
6.23
Interest income on plan assets
6.45
19.21
Employer contributions
3.43
0.08
Return on plan assets greater/(lesser) than discount rate
1.25
-8.42
Benefits paid
-9.36
100.73
Fair Value of assets at the end of current period
102.50
Table 4: Additional Disclosure Information

(₹ in crore)
A: Expected benefit payments for the year ending
March 31, 2027
7.34
March 31, 2028
7.49
March 31, 2029
7.64
March 31, 2030
7.76
March 31, 2031
7.77
March 31, 2032 to March 31, 2036
38.72
Beyond 10 years
159.71
Weighted average duration of defined benefit obligation
11 Years
Accrued Benefit Obligation at 31 March 2026
98.20
Description of Plan Characteristics and Associated Risks:
The PRMB scheme is a fixed monetary amount Defined Benefit Plan that provides for a lump 
sum payment made after retirement when a retiree claims medical benefits. The benefits are 
defined on the basis of amount claimed under medical expenses (valued as a premium paid 
by the company to the insurance company) upto a maximum limit after Retirement.
The Plan design means the risks commonly affecting the liabilities and the financial results 
are expected to be:
1 	
Interest rate risk: The defined benefit obligation calculated uses a discount rate based 
on government bonds. If bond yields fall, the defined benefit obligation will tend to 
increase
2 	
Medical Inflation risk: Higher than expected increase in premium can lead to increase 
in defined benefit obligation. Although, this risk is mitigated by capping the benefit paid 
by the insurance company (limiting the premium amount for the company).



	
333
3. 	
Demographic risk: This is the risk of variability of results due to unsystematic nature 
of decrements that include mortality, withdrawal, disability and retirement. The effect of 
these decrements on the defined benefit obligation is not straight forward and depends 
upon the combination of salary increase, discount rate and vesting criteria. It is important 
not to overstate withdrawals because in the financial analysis the retirement benefit of 
a short career employee typically costs less per year as compared to a long service 
employee.
Description of Funding Arrangements and Policies:
There are no Statutory minimum funding requirements for such plans mandated in India. 
However a company can fund the benefits by way of a separate irrevocable Trust to take 
advantage of tax exemptions and also to ensure security of benefits.
The scheme is funded by way of a separate irrevocable Trust and the Group is expected 
to make regular contributions to the Trust. The fund is managed by an insurance company 
and the assets are invested in their conventional group gratuity product. The fund provides 
a capital guarantee of the balance accumulated and declares interest periodically that is 
credited to the fund account. Although we know that the fund manager invests the funds as 
per products approved by IRDA and investment guidelines as stipulated under section 101 of 
IT Act, the exact asset mix is unknown and not publicly available.
The Trust assets managed by the fund manager are highly liquid in nature and we do not 
expect any significant liquidity risks.
The Trustees are responsible for the investment of the assets of the Trust as well as the day 
to day administration of the scheme. Administrative expenses of the trust are met by the 
Group. The Trustees are required to conduct necessary business e.g. Approval of Trust's 
Financial Statements, Review Investment performance.
Table 5: Sensitivity Analysis
Disclosure Item
(₹ in crore)
DBO on base assumptions as at 31st March 2026
98.20
                                        Discount Rate
Discount Rate as at 31st March 2026
6.90%
Effect on DBO due to 0.5% increase in discount rate
-4.79
                                        Percentage Impact
-5.0%
Effect on DBO due to 0.5% decrease in discount rate
5.27
                                       Percentage Impact
5.0%


334
4 a)	 Contingent Liabilities (Ind AS-37)
	
Claims against the Company not acknowledged as debts (including interest, 
wherever applicable)

(₹ in crore)
Sl 
No.
Particulars
Central 
Government
State 
Government 
and other
localities
CPSE others
Total
1
Opening as on 01.04.2024
192.23
4.17
196.40
2
Addition during the year
2.21
2.21
3
Claims settled during the year
a. From opening balance
1.20
1.20
b. Out of addition during the year
c. Total claims settled during the year (a+b)
1.20
1.20
4
Closing as on 31.03.2025
192.23
5.18
197.41

(₹ in crore)
Sl 
No.
Particulars
Central 
Government
State 
Government 
and other
localities
CPSE others
Total
1
Opening as on 01.04.2025
192.23
5.18
197.41
2
Addition during the year
5.19
12.98
18.17
3
Claims settled during the year
a. From opening balance
b. Out of addition during the year
c. Total claims settled during the year 
(a+b)
4
Closing as on 31.03.2026
197.42
18.16
215.58
Contingent Liability
SI 
No
Particulars
Amount in crore as 
on 31.03.2026
Amount in crore as 
on 31-03-2025
1.
Central Government
Income Tax
126.32
123.20
GST
71.10
69.03
Sub-Total
197.42
192.23
Others: (If any)
Miscellaneous
18.16
5.18
Grand Total
215.58
197.41



	
335
* 	 The Company is contesting demands raised by tax authorities in respect of direct and indirect taxes, which 
are currently under dispute and pending before various appellate forums. As at 31st March 2026, contingent 
liabilities have been disclosed, excluding interest and penalties. Interest, where applicable, from the date of 
the respective orders up to the reporting date, is currently unascertainable and will be accounted for upon final 
adjudication.
**	For details regarding the charge created on the Company's current assets as part of a pooled consortium 
arrangement, Refer i-Other Significant Matters for details of the arrangement.
a)	
Commitments (Ind AS-37)

(₹ in crore)
Particulars
31.03.2026
31.03.2025
Estimated amount of contracts remaining to be executed on 
capital account not provided for others
29.79
69.81
Revenue Commitment
714.41
517.21
Lease Commitment
1.11
1.36
b)	
Contingent Assets: A contingent asset is a possible asset that arises from past events 
and whose existence will be confirmed only by the occurrence or non-occurrence of 
one or more uncertain future events not wholly within the control of the entity. During 
the normal course of business, several unresolved claims are currently outstanding. 
The inflow of economic benefits, in respect of such claims cannot be measured due to 
uncertainties that surround the related events and circumstances.
c)	
Guarantee

(₹ in crore)
Particulars
31.03.2026
31.03.2025
The Company has given Bank Guarantees - for which there is a 
floating charge on Current Assets of the Company
1.64
0.14
d)	
Earnings Per Share (IndAS 33)
Particulars
For the 
year ended 
31.03.2026
For the 
year ended 
31.03.2025
Net profit after tax in Rupees (crore) attributable to Equity 
Share Holders 
613.18
666.91
Weighted Average no. of Equity Shares Outstanding
714000000
714000000
Basic and Diluted Earnings per Share in Rupees (Face value 
₹ 2/- per share)
8.59
9.34


336
e)	
Related Party Disclosures (IndAS 24)
List of Related Parties
i)
Sister Companies
ii) Post-Employment Benefit Fund and others
1
Eastern Coalfields Limited (ECL)
1
Coal India Employees Gratuity Fund
2
Bharat Coking Coal Limited (BCCL)
2
Coal Mines Provident Fund (CMPF)
3
Central Coalfields Limited (CCL)
3
Coal India Superannuation Benefit Fund Trust
4
Western Coalfields Limited (WCL)
4
Contributory Post Retirement Medicare 
Scheme for Non- Executives Modified
5
South Eastern Coalfields Limited (SECL)
5
CIL Executive Defined Contribution Pension Trust
6
Northern Coalfields Limited (NCL)
7
Mahanadi Coalfields Limited (MCL)
8
Coal India Limited (CIL) – Holding Company
iii) 	 Key Managerial Personnel
31-03-2026
Name
Designation
W.e.f
Shri Manoj Kumar
Chairman - cum - Managing Director
04.10.2021 to 31.10.2025
Shri Satish Jha
Chairman - cum - Managing Director 
(Additional Charge)
01.11.2025 to 01.01.2026
Shri Chaudhari Shivraj Singh 
Chairman - cum - Managing Director
02.01.2026
Shri Mukesh Agrawal
Part Time Official Director
17.10.2024
Shri Marapally Venkateshwarlu
Part Time Official Director
01.01.2025
Shri Shankar Nagachari
Director (Technical)
02.09.2022 to 28.02.2026
Shri Ajay Kumar
Director (Technical)
26.10.2022
Shri Rajeev Kumar Sinha
Director (Technical)
31.10.2025
Shri Nripendra Nath
Director (Technical)
31.10.2025
Shri Sudip Dasgupta
Chief Financial Officer
01.10.2024
Shri Abhishek Mundhra
Company Secretary
18.02.2016



	
337
iv)	
Remuneration of Key Managerial Personnel
	
	

(₹ in crore)
Sl. No. Particulars 
For the year ended 
31.03.2026
For the year ended 
31.03.2025
i)
Short Term Employee Benefits
a)
Payment to Chairman cum Managing Directors, 
Whole Time Directors, Chief Financial Officer 
and Company Secretary
4.29
4.29
b) Sitting Fees to Independent Directors
-
-
ii)
Post-Employment Benefits
0.64
0.72
iii)
Other Long Term Benefits*
0.25
0.13
iv)
Termination Benefits 
-
-
v)
Share Based Payments
-
-
TOTAL
5.18
5.14
* Actuarial Valuation of defined benefits for KMPs like Leave Encashment and Gratuity has been excluded 
from Remuneration of Key Managerial Personnel.
Note : 	 Besides above, whole time Directors have been allowed to use of cars for private journey 
up to a ceiling of 1000 KMs on payment of ₹ 2000 per month as per service conditions.
v)	
Balances Outstanding with Key Managerial Personnel

(₹ in crore)
Sl. No.
Particulars
As on 31.03.2026
As on 31.03.2025
i)
Amount Payable
Nil
Nil
ii)
Amount Receivable
Nil
Nil
No Trade or other receivables are due from directors or other officers of the company 
either severally or jointly with any other person. Nor any trade or other receivable are due 
from firms or private companies respectively in which any director is a partner, a director or 
member. Further there is no loans to related parties (Directors, Key Managerial Persons and 
others).


338
Transactions with Related Parties for the period Ended 31.03.2026

(₹ in crore)
Name of 
Related Parties
Loan to 
Related 
Parties
Loan 
from 
Related 
Parties
Apex
Charges
Rehabili 
tation 
Charges
Lease 
Rent 
Income
Interest 
on Funds 
parked by 
subsidiaries
IICM
charges
Any 
Other 
(Sales)*
Dividend 
paid 
Current 
Account 
Balances 
(Payable/ 
Receivable)
Outstanding 
Balances 
(Payable/ 
Receivable)*
Eastern 
Coalfields 
Limited (ECL)
151.30
188.30
Bharat Coking 
Coal Limited 
(BCCL)
71.99
43.62
Central 
Coalfields 
Limited (CCL)
162.22
88.86
Western 
Coalfields 
Limited (WCL)
326.20
92.61
South Eastern 
Coalfields 
Limited 
(SECL)
461.81
169.28
Northern 
Coalfields 
Limited (NCL)
166.47
32.07
Mahanadi 
Coalfields 
Limited (MCL)
185.40
52.67
Coal India 
Limited (CIL)
27.46
374.91**
(51.29)
32.39
Coal India 
Limited (CIL)-
R&D
11.65
(98.97)***
*	
The Any Other (Sales) figures & outstanding balances (payable or receivable) figures, represent 
the core transaction amounts and are exclusive of Goods and Services Tax (GST).
**	 Dividend Paid Note: In FY 2025–26, the company disbursed an interim dividend amounting to 
₹224.91 crore, in addition to the final dividend of ₹150.00 crore for FY 2024–25.
***	Net payable position of ₹98.97 crore after offsetting receivables of ₹11.26 crore against liabilities 
of ₹110.23 crore towards CIL R&D Fund.
The Company has not availed any portion of the consortium credit facility availed by CIL 
during the year. However, its current assets have been provided as collateral in support of 
the facility. For further details, refer i-Other Significant Matters for details of the arrangement.



	
339
Transactions with Related Parties for the year Ended 31.03.2025

(₹ in crore)
Name of 
Related Parties
Loan to 
Related 
Parties
Loan 
from 
Related 
Parties
Apex
Charges
Rehabili 
tation 
Charges
Lease 
Rent 
Income
Interest 
on Funds 
parked by 
subsidiaries
IICM
charges
Any 
Other 
(Sales)
Dividend 
paid  
(Refer 
below 
note)
Current 
Account 
Balances 
(Payable/ 
Receivable)
Outstanding 
Balances 
(Payable/ 
Receivable)
Eastern 
Coalfields 
Limited (ECL)
146.89
136.33
Bharat Coking 
Coal Limited 
(BCCL)
74.76
43.18
Central 
Coalfields 
Limited (CCL)
163.96
116.56
Western 
Coalfields 
Limited (WCL)
225.26
74.22
South Eastern 
Coalfields 
Limited 
(SECL)
459.96
163.07
Northern 
Coalfields 
Limited (NCL)
150.24
27.81
Mahanadi 
Coalfields 
Limited (MCL)
150.10
55.26
Coal India 
Limited (CIL)
15.48
200.97**
61.58
17.36
Coal India 
Limited (CIL)-
R&D
24.02
(3.65) ***
*	
The Any Other (Sales) figures & outstanding balances (payable or receivable) figures, represent 
the core transaction amounts and are exclusive of Goods and Services Tax (GST).
**	 Dividend Paid Note: In F.Y 2024–25, the company disbursed an interim dividend amounting to 
₹150.00 crore, in addition to the final dividend of ₹50.97 crore for F.Y 2023–24.
***	Net payable position of ₹3.65 crore after offsetting receivables of ₹1.82 crore against liabilities of 
₹5.47 crore towards CIL R&D Fund.
The Company has not availed any portion of the consortium credit facility availed by 
CIL during the year. However, its current assets have been provided as collateral in support 
of the facility. For further details, refer i- Other Significant Matters for details of the 
arrangement.


340
f)	
Disaggregated revenue information:

(₹ in crore)
For the 
Year ended 
31.03.2026
For the 
Year ended 
31.03.2025
Types of goods or service
- Coal
- Others
2316.53
2102.76
Total revenue from contracts with customers
2316.53
2102.76
Types of customers
- Power sector
27.95
21.40
- Non-Power Sector
2288.58
2081.36
- Others or services (CMPDIL)
-
-
Total revenue from contracts with customers
2316.53
2102.76
Types of contract
- FSA
-
-
- E Auction
-
-
- Others
2316.53
2102.76
Total revenue from contracts with customers
2316.53
2102.76
Total Revenue
2316.53
2102.76
CIL Groups
1564.50
1410.68
Outsider
752.03
692.08
Timing of goods or service
- Goods transferred at a point in time
-
-
- Goods transferred over time
-
-
- Service transferred at a point in time 
2316.53
2102.76
- Service transferred over time
-
-
Total revenue from contracts with customers
2316.53
2102.76
g)	
Ratios:
i)	
Current Ratio
For the Year ended 
31.03.2026
For the year ended  
31.03.2025
Variance
3.35
4.43
-1.08



	
341
The current ratio is a liquidity ratio that measures the current resources to meet its short-
term obligations. Current ratio has been calculated as Current Assets divided by Current 
liabilities.
ii)	
Return on Equity ratio
For the Year ended 
31.03.2026
For the year ended  
31.03.2025
Variance
28.35%
36.71%
-8.36%
Return on equity (ROE) is a measure of financial performance calculated by dividing 
PAT by Average shareholders' equity. Where average shareholders' equity = (Opening 
Equity + Closing Equity)/2. Other Equity excludes Capital Reserve.
iii)	
Trade Receivable Ratio
For the Year ended 
31.03.2026
For the year ended  
31.03.2025
Variance
2.28
2.17
0.11
The receivables turnover ratio is an accounting measure used to quantify a company's 
effectiveness in collecting its accounts receivable, or the money owed by customers. 
Account receivables Turnover = Net Credit Sales/Average trade receivables.
 iv)	 Net Capital Turnover ratio
For the Year ended 
31.03.2026
For the year ended  
31.03.2025
Variance
1.13
1.13
0.00
Net Capital turnover is the measure that indicates organization's efficiency in relation to 
the utilization of capital employed in the business and it has been calculated as a ratio 
of net sales divided by the amount of working capital during the same period. Net capital 
turnover ratio = Net Sales / Working Capital.
Net sales shall be calculated as total sales minus sales returns.
Working capital shall be calculated as current assets minus current liabilities.
v)	
Net Profit Ratio
For the Year ended 
31.03.2026
For the year ended  
31.03.2025
Variance
26.47%
31.72%
-5.25%


342
It measures the relationship between net profit and sales of the business. 
Net Profit Ratio = Net Profit / Net Sales
Net profit shall be after tax.
Net sales shall be calculated as total sales minus sales returns.
vi)	
Return on capital Employed
For the Year ended 
31.03.2026
For the year ended 
31.03.2025
Variance
32.85%
40.36%
-7.51%
Return on capital employed indicates the ability of a company’s management to generate 
returns for both the debt holders and the equity holders. Higher the ratio, more efficiently 
is the capital being employed by the company to generate returns.
ROCE = Earnings before interest and taxes / Capital Employed
Capital Employed = Tangible Net Worth + Total Debt + Deferred Tax Liability
i) 	
Other Significant Matters:
Consortium Facility and Collateral Arrangement:
The Holding Company, CIL, has availed a consortium cash credit facility aggregating 
₹430 crores (comprising ₹140 crores of fund-based and ₹290 crores of non-fund-based 
limits), sanctioned by a consortium of banks for the benefit of itself and its subsidiaries. 
This facility is structured as a pooled credit arrangement and can be drawn by the CIL 
and/or its subsidiaries, individually or collectively, within the sanctioned limits, based 
on operational requirements.
Although the CMPDI has not availed any amount from this facility during the year, its 
current assets have been mortgaged as collateral security for the facility. Consequent-
ly, a financial obligation may devolve on the CMPDI in the event of default by other 
group entities.
The CIL, where applicable, submits quarterly current asset statements to the consortium 
lenders. CIL monitors credit and liquidity risks centrally at a consolidated level.



	
343
i)	
Other Information
i.	
Benami Property: No proceedings have been initiated or pending against the 
Company under the Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act,1988. 
ii.	
Returns or statements filed with banks or financial institutions: The quarterly 
returns / statement of current assets filed by the Company with banks / financial 
institutions are generally in agreement with the books of accounts.
iii.	
Willful Defaulter: Company has not been declared as a willful defaulter by any 
bank or financial institution or any other lender.
iv.	
Relationship with Struck off Companies: Company has not undertaken any 
material transactions with struck-off companies.
v.	
Registration of charges or satisfaction with Registrar of Companies: No 
charges or satisfaction is pending for registration with Registrar of Companies 
beyond the statutory period by the Company.
vi.	
Compliance with number of layers of companies: The provisions of clause 
(87) of section 2 of the Act read with the Companies (Restriction on number of 
Layers) Rules, 2017 are not applicable to the Company as per Section 2(45) of 
the Companies Act, 2013.
vii.	
Compliance with approved Scheme(s) of Arrangements: There were no 
scheme of Arrangements approved by the competent authority during the year in 
terms of sections 230 to 237 of the Companies Act, 2013.
viii.	 Utilization of Borrowed funds and share premium: (A) Company has not 
advanced or loaned or invested any fund to any entity (Intermediaries) with the 
understanding that the Intermediary shall lend or invest in party identified by or on 
behalf of the Company (Ultimate Beneficiaries). (B) Company has not received 
any fund from any party with the understanding that the Company shall whether, 
directly or indirectly lend or invest in other entities identified by or on behalf of the 
Company (“Ultimate Beneficiaries”) or provide any guarantee, security or the like 
on behalf of the Ultimate Beneficiaries.
ix.	
Crypto Currency or Virtual Currency: Company has not traded or invested in 
Crypto currency or Virtual Currency during the financial year.
x.	
Undisclosed Income: Company does not have any transaction which is not 
recorded in the books of accounts that has been surrendered or disclosed as 
income during the year in the tax assessments under the Income Tax Act, 1961.


344
xi.	
Material Accounting Policies and Notes to these Financial Statements are 
intended to serve as a means of informative disclosure and a guide for better 
understanding of the position of the Company. Recognizing this purpose, the 
Company has disclosed only such Policies and Notes from individual financial 
statements, which fairly present the needed disclosure.
xii.	
Current Assets, Loans and Advances etc. The value on realization on current 
assets, loans and advances in the ordinary course of business would not be less 
than the amount at which they are stated in the Balance sheet.
xiii.	 Insurance and escalation claims: Insurance and escalation claims are 
accounted for on the basis of admission/final settlement.
xiv.	 Balance Confirmations: The Company has a procedure for obtaining periodic 
confirmation of balances from banks. There are no unconfirmed balances in 
respect of bank accounts and borrowings from banks & financial institutions. With 
regard to other parties, reconciliations are made and the balance confirmation 
letters/emails are also sent on a periodic basis.
xv.	
Segment Reporting: The Company’s main business is consultancy services. All 
activities of the company revolve around the main business. As such, there are 
no separate reportable segments for the company.
xvi.	 Figures for previous year have been regrouped wherever necessary, in order to 
make them comparable.
xvii.	 The material accounting policy information have been updated to enhance clarity 
for users of the financial statements. These updates do not carry any financial 
implications. 
xviii.	Note – 1 and 2 represents Corporate information and Material Accounting Policy 
information respectively, Note 3 to 11 form part of the Balance Sheet and 12 to 15 
form part of Statement of Profit & Loss. Note – 16 represents Additional Notes to 
the Financial Statements.
xix.	 Recent Accounting pronouncements applicable in Financial Year 2025-26:
The Ministry of Corporate Affairs (MCA) has issued several amendments during 
the year to the Companies (Indian Accounting Standards) Rules, 2015, introducing 
changes to various Indian Accounting Standards (Ind AS) applicable from the 
date of publication in the Official Gazette. These amendments issued on 7th May, 
2025 and 13th August, 2025 cover amendments or consequential amendments



	
345
to Ind AS 1, 7, 10, 12, 21, 28, 32, 101, 107, 108, 109, 115 and 116. The Group 
has evaluated these amendments and find no material impact on its financial 
statements.
The Financial Statement, have been approved by the Board of Directors of the company 
in their meeting dated: 21.04.2026
Signature to Note 1 to 16.
For CENTRAL MINE PLANNING & DESIGN INSTITUTE LIMITED
Sd/-
(Abhishek Mundhra)
Company Secretary
Sd/-
(Sudip Dasgupta)
CFO
DIN- 10802727
Sd/-
(Rajeev Kumar Sinha)
Director
DIN- 11363113
Sd/-
(Chaudhari Shivraj Singh)
Chairman-Cum-
Managing Director
DIN- 11416124
In terms of our report of even date attached
For DEOKI BIJAY & Co.
Chartered Accountants
FRN- 313105E
Sd/-
(CA Abhishek Kedia)
Partner
Membership No. 401607
UDIN : 26401607ETSGWS6975
Date: 21-04-2026
Place: Ranchi